=== PAGE 1 ===
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy for the 
Federal Government of Somalia  
September 2023  
Authors  
Dr. Kato Kimbugwe 
Imogen Dorricott 
Zakaria Hassan 
Hussein Yusuf Idhow 
Musa Sherif 
info@vanguardeconomics.com
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
0 
 
 
Foreword 
Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
H.E. Hon. Jibril Abdirashid Haji Abdi 
 
The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) is an initiative by African countries to create a single 
market for goods and services, free movement of people and capital, and to promote economic 
integration across the continent. The AfCFTA is one of the most significant milestones in Africa's economic 
development and has the potential to significantly boost the continent's growth prospects in particularly 
Somalia. 
 
The AFCFTA will create a market of over 1.2 billion people and a combined GDP of over $3 trillion. By 
removing tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade, businesses in participating countries will have access to 
a much larger market, which will lead to increased trade and investment opportunities. Job creation: The 
AFCFTA is expected to create millions of jobs in Africa, particularly in industries such as agriculture, 
manufacturing, and services. Increased competitiveness: By creating a larger market and promoting 
competition, the AFCFTA will encourage businesses to become more efficient and innovative, which will 
help to boost productivity and competitiveness. Somalia needs more than any other country in Africa to 
achieve the goals of economic growth, job creation, poverty alleviation, and to find lasting peace and 
stability, so the implementation of this agreement means that we will achieve all these goals. 
 
The AFCFTA presents both opportunities and challenges for African countries. To address these challenges 
and realize the full benefits of the agreement, The federal government of Somalia is working to address 
non-tariff barriers, invest in infrastructure, build capacity, support SMEs, and collaborate with other 
governments. 
The successful implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AFCFTA) requires strong 
commitment and support from governments across the continent. The federal Government of Somalia 
will put in place the necessary policies and regulations, invest in infrastructure, support SMEs, collaborate 
with other governments, and engage with the public to ensure the success of the agreement. 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude and recognition for the invaluable contributions you have 
made towards the successful implementation of AfCFTA. the successful implementation of AfCFTA 
requires the collaboration and commitment of a wide range of stakeholders, including governments, 
businesses, trade unions, civil society groups, and many others. Each of you has played a critical role in 
shaping the implementation strategy, providing feedback, and advocating for policies that align with your 
interests and goals. 
Jibril Abdirashid Haji Abdi 
Minister of Commerce and Industry
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
1 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
The Federal Government of Somali (FGS) would like to thank the United Nations Economic Commission 
for Africa for the financial and technical support they provided to enable the elaboration of this 
strategy. In addition, the FGS recognises the financial support of Global Affairs Canada (GAC). The Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) would like to thank all FSG stakeholders who have offered their 
uninhibited cooperation by providing relevant information during the interviews and provided vital inputs 
to strategy development. FGS would also like to acknowledge the following for the extensive inputs the 
provided in the elaboration of the strategy.  
 
Name  
Designation  
Organisation  
Abdirazak Hassan Yusuf 
Director of Investment  
Ministry of Commerce 
Mustaf Ibrahim Adan 
 
Head of Food Security and Early 
Action 
Ministry of Livestock Forestry, & Range 
Aidarus Mohamed Hassan 
Deputy Director  
Somali Bureau of Standards 
Mahdi Daud  
Chief Economist  
Central Bank of Somalia 
Najbullah Issak 
Chief Economist  
Ministry of Finance 
Sowda Mire Osman 
Director of Agribusiness  
Ministry of Agriculture 
Amal Abubakar 
Technical Advisor  
Ministry of Youth & Sports 
Eng Ali Afey 
Director of ICT 
Ministry of Communication & Technology 
Hassan Abdiaziz Ahmed 
Former Director of Customs 
Revenue & Customs Authority 
Abdirizak 
Mohamed 
Mohamud 
SCAA focal point for the SAATM 
Somali Civil Aviation Authority 
Mahad Mohamed Abukar 
 
Director of Legal and Treaties 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International 
Cooperation 
 
The FGS would specifically like to thank Dr Andrew Mold, Dr Rogers Mukwaya and Ms Chaltu Daniel 
Kalbessa from UNECA SRO Kigali for the support they have provided in the management of the 
consultancy that has enabled the development of this strategy. Finally, the FGS would like to thank the 
Vanguard Economics Team led by Dr Kato Kimbugwe, Ms Imogen Dorricott, Mr Zakaria Hassan, Mr 
Hussein Yusuf Idhow, Mr Musa Sherif and Ms Solange Rwema for the work undertaken in the elaboration 
of the strategy.
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
2 
 
 
List of abbreviations  
 
Acronym 
Long Form 
Acronym 
Long Form 
3D 
3 Dimensional 
KII 
Key Informant Interview 
ACP 
African, Caribbean, and Pacific 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
ADBM 
Analogue-to-Digital Broadcast Migration 
MOCI 
Ministry of Commerce& Industry 
ADF 
African Development Fund 
MVA 
Manufacturing Value Added 
AfCAC 
African Civil Aviation Commission 
NAFTA 
North American Free Trade Agreement 
AfCFTA 
African Continental Free Trade Area 
NBS 
National Bureau of Statistics 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
NDP-9 
Ninth National Development Plan 
Afri Exim 
Bank 
African Export-Import Bank 
NDP-8 
Eighth National Development Plan 
Agro 
Agriculture 
NEC 
National Economic Council 
AI 
Artificial Intelligence 
NIPS 
National Investment Promotion Strategy 
AIDA 
Accelerated Industrial Development for 
Africa 
No. 
Number  
ARII 
Africa Regional Integration Index 
NTBs 
Non-tariff barriers 
ARIPO 
African Regional Intellectual Property 
Organization 
NTFC 
National Trade Facilitation Committee 
ARSO 
African Organization for Standardization  
NTMs 
Non-Tariff Measures 
ATEX 
African Trade Exchange 
OAPI 
Organization Africaine de la propriete (African intellectual 
Property Organization) 
ATO 
African trade Observatory 
OAU 
Organization for African Unity 
AU 
African Union 
ODI 
Overseas Development Institute 
AUC 
African Union Commission 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
AVRIVA 
Accelerating Virtual-Resilient Integration 
for a Vibrant Africa 
OECD-DAC 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s 
Development Assistance Committee 
B2C 
Business to Consumer 
OIF 
Organization International de la Francophonie 
BIAT 
Boosting Intra African Trade 
OSBPs 
One stop Border Posts 
BITs 
Bilateral Investment Treaties 
PIDA 
Program Infrastructure Development for Africa 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
CFTA 
Continental Free Trade Area 
PS 
Private Sector 
COMESA 
Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa 
PTA Bank 
Trade and development Bank for Eastern and Southern 
Africa 
Covid-19 
Coronavirus of 2019 
PWDs 
People living with Disabilities 
DB 
Doing Business 
RECs 
Regional Economic Communities 
Dec. 
December 
RoA 
Rest of Africa 
DIFTZ 
Djibouti International Free Trade Zone 
RoO 
Rules of Origin 
DRC 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
ROW 
Rest of the World 
DSM 
Dispute Settlement Mechanism 
SAATM 
Single African Air Transport Market 
EABC 
East African Business Council 
SADC 
The Southern African Development Community 
EAC 
East African Community 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
EAC Sec 
East African Community Secretariat 
SDM 
Single Digital Market 
EACA 
East African Community Competition 
Authority 
SDRF 
Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility 
EACJ 
East African Court of Justice 
SEZs 
Special Economic Zones 
EALA 
East African Legislative Assembly 
SIF 
Somali Infrastructure Fund 
EASDM 
East African Single Digital Market 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Entreprises 
ECA 
Economic Commission for Africa 
SNIS 
Somalia National Infrastructure Strategy 
E-commerce 
Electronic Commerce 
SOBS 
Somalia Bureau of Standards 
E-
government  
Electronic government 
SOMINVEST 
Somalia investment promotion office 
EPZs 
Export Processing Zones 
SPS 
Sanitary and phytosanitary 
E-trade 
Electronic Trade 
TBT 
Technical Barriers to Trade 
EU 
European Union 
TFTA 
Tripartite Free Trade Area 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth& Development 
Office 
TIFA 
Trade and Investment Framework Agreements 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
TMEA 
TradeMark Africa
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
3 
 
 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
FIB 
Foreign Investment Board 
TRIPS 
Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights 
FIL 
Foreign Investment Law 
TSNA 
Transport Sector Needs Assessment 
FMP 
Free Movement of Persons 
UK 
United Kingdom 
FT 
Financial Times 
UN 
United Nations 
GDP 
Gross Domestic product 
UN 
COMTRADE 
United Nations International Trade Statistics 
GETS 
Growth and Economic Transformation 
Strategy 
UNCTAD 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
UNDP 
United Nations development Programme 
IBID 
“Ibidem” or in the same place 
UNECA 
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 
ICBT 
Informal cross-border trade 
UNIDO 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
ICJ 
International Court of Justice 
US 
United States 
ICT 
Information and Communications 
Technology 
USA 
United States of America 
IDP 
Internally displaced people 
USD 
United states Dollar 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
WBDB 
World Bank Doing Business 
ILO 
International Labour Organization 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
WTO 
World Trade Organization 
IoT 
Internet of Things 
 
 
IP 
Intellectual Property 
 
 
IPRs 
Intellectual Property Rights 
 
 
IT 
Information Technology 
 
 
ITC 
International Trade Centre
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
4 
 
 
Executive Summary  
This strategy was developed to help the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to kick-start its national 
AfCFTA implementation. The elaboration of the strategy involved the implementation of a three-pronged 
methodology – private sector AfCFTA perceptions survey; key informant interviews with stakeholders in 
Somalia, the region, and beyond; and review of extensive literature on the AfCFTA and review of 
secondary data sources.  
 
The AfCFTA promises a virtuous circle of greater market opportunities, triggering more trade and 
investment, and allowing greater value addition and productivity growth – leading to decent job creation 
and inclusive growth, and thus further enlarged markets. But for the full benefits of the AfCFTA to accrue 
to African countries and citizens, numerous additional policy enablers – measures, reforms, and 
investment – are also key, not least in infrastructure, transport corridors and logistics, as well as reforms 
to improve the business climate in African countries. 
 
Despite high-level political momentum around the AfCFTA, its ultimate success depends on African States 
not only ratifying, but fully implementing and complying with the AfCFTA, while also investing in the 
necessary enablers. Several constraints and opportunities have been identified and addressed in the 
strategy.  
 
Opportunities identified  
The AfCFTA presents a range of opportunities for Somalia. These include the following:  
● Political drive to implement – one of the key reasons for the slow pace of African integration has 
been the lack of political drive to implement agreements and initiatives. The newly elected 
Federal government has indicated the importance of international continental and regional trade 
integration. The AfCFTA agreements has been approved by cabinet and is now being tabled at the 
newly elected parliament. The new President has indicated the importance of regional integration 
initiatives by appointing an envoy to the East African Community (EAC) to oversee and fast track 
Somalia’s application to join the EAC. At continental level, there is strong political awareness and 
drive to implement the agreement, as demonstrated by (i) the speed and number of ratifications; 
and (ii) number of countries developing AfCFTA implementation strategies. Somalia is well placed 
to benefit from this drive to reform and harmonize African trade. 
● Ease of harmonization – The East African Community (EAC) is one of the most integrated regional 
economic communities on the African continent. The EAC has the lead the way in the 
implementation of far-reaching regional trade reforms that have driven significant intra-
community trade. Somalia has now joined the EAC, hence it is able to adopt and benefit from tried 
and tested trade policy and legislation that would ease harmonization of both regional and 
continental trade frameworks. For example, the region has established frameworks for trade 
facilitation and coordination that have helped reduce the cost of trading in the EAC.  
● Access to technical expertise – Somalia has large young and educated diaspora keen to return 
and contribute to its development and fill the capacity and skills gaps. Somalia can also call on an 
East African pool of technical experts with regional experience in supporting the implementation 
of trade related reforms / strategies.   
● Leverage trade infrastructure and corridors – There are significant infrastructure upgrades and 
trade corridors that have been established in the region which Somalia can leverage to enhance 
its access to the continent. For example, the Mombasa-Kigali Corridor comprises the Mombasa 
Port, the Mombasa-Nairobi railway network, and over 1,700 km of roads that link both cities. 
Mombasa is Africa’s fifth-busiest port the main trade gateway for the Eastern Africa region
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
5 
 
 
connecting Somalia with EAC members states - Kenya, Uganda, South Sudan, Rwanda, Burundi, 
and DRC. The transformation of the Berbera corridor into an economic hub is being hailed as a 
game changer for the country's livestock-based, remittance-dependent economy. Integration of 
Somalia into these trade corridors will provide access to markets, connecting adjoining countries, 
transit countries and providing access to seaports for landlocked countries.  
● Interest in financing the AfCFTA – The AfCFTA carries such significance and importance to African 
countries and to the rest of the world. The long-term benefits of the AfCFTA to the continent have 
helped attract finance from its Pan-African institutions such as the AfDB, Afrieximbank, PTA Bank, 
Africa Finance corporation, etc. to support the implementation of various components of the 
agreement. Additionally, there is a host of multilateral organisations that have expressed an 
interest and are providing funding for the AfCFTA at continental, regional and national levels. 
Most of the finance is targeted at addressing the more than funding gap of up to $100 billion for 
infrastructure that would open the continent to increased and sustain internal trade. Somalia has 
already tapped some of this funding for its trade related infrastructure.  
● Women and youth stand to gain – in Somalia, the region and continent women dominate 
informal cross border trade. According to the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), women 
account for around 70% of informal cross- border traders in Africa1. Tariff reductions under the 
AfCFTA will enable informal women traders to operate through formal channels, bringing better 
protection. The removal of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) will address the numerous barriers that have 
continued to affect and limit trading opportunities for women. The AfCFTA has now added a 
women and youth in trade protocol to the phase two AfCFTA negotiations to ensure that these 
important demographic groups actively participate and benefit from the AfCFTA.  
● Drive job creation - the AfCFTA represents an opportunity for firms to access new markets. In 
Somalia, increased intra African trade is expected to create new opportunities and jobs in sectors 
like agro-processing, light manufacturing, fishing, meat processing, transport and logistics 
including shipping etc. These jobs are critical in helping the Somalia meet its growing demand for 
jobs as well as facilitating social cohesion and peace.  
● Contribute to reducing poverty – an assessment by the World Bank (2020) of the impact of the 
AfCFTA on poverty on the continent suggests that its implementation will boost regional income 
by 7% or $450 billion, speed up wage growth for women, and lift 30 million people out of extreme 
poverty by 20352. Wages for both skilled and unskilled workers will also be boosted by about 
10%3. 
 
Constraints to be addressed. 
There are number of challenges outlined in the ToC. These are summarised in this section but are 
addressed in detail in Part B of the strategy; 
● Security and governance – The security situation within Somalia over the last five years has 
greatly improved with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its replacement the 
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). Nevertheless, perceptions of insecurity 
continue to affect views on whether the country is open for trade or a safe destination for FDI. 
Similarly, the crippling debt (estimated at $3.8 billion4 or 66% of GDP5 in Q1 2023) continues to 
affect the ability to finance its development. Additionally, the country is still under UN sanctions 
 
1 https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/36085-doc-qa_cfta_en_rev15march.pdf 
2 WBG (202) The AfCFTA – economic and distributional effects  
3 ibid 
4 https://mof.gov.so/sites/default/files/Publications/Public%20debt%20bulletin%20report_QI%2C%202023.pdf 
5 https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/imf-reaches-staff-agreement-with-somalia-eyes-debt-forgiveness-late-2023-2022-10-18/
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
6 
 
 
and other sanctions regimes6 imposed by the US, UK and EU which continue to restrict the ability 
to trade and affect financial transactions. Border disputes with neighbouring countries continue 
to affect the flow of trade and limit the growth of some sectors of the economy. For example, the 
maritime border dispute7 with Kenya limits the potential of the fisheries sector and Somalia’s 
efforts to exploits its oil and gas resources within its exclusive economic zone.  
● Slow pace of accession or ratification of trade agreements – Somalia signed the AfCFTA 
agreements on the 26 March 2018 and the treaty was then approved by cabinet on the 14th 
August 2020. The treaty is now awaiting parliamentary approval before the instrument of 
ratification is then deposited with the AUC8.  
● Low existing level of Somalia trade with the African continent – The majority of Somalia’s trade 
is with countries in the gulf where it exports livestock and other agricultural produce. In 2018, the 
United Arab Emirates, Oman, Saudi Arabia, China, and Japan together accounted for 81 percent 
of total Somalia’s exports9. The bulk of its imports are also sourced from Asia and the middle east. 
Over time, Kenya, India, and, more recently, China displaced Europe and the United States as 
Somalia’s most important import suppliers10. Trade with other African countries (Kenya, Ethiopia 
and Djibouti) is mainly informal and hence there are limited records on its value and composition. 
In the survey conducted for this strategy, 57% businesses located in Somalia found it difficult to 
export to other Africa countries while 50% found it difficult to import from other African 
countries11.  
● Fractured internal market – Discussions with private sectors representative bodies indicate that 
numerous Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs) affect the movement of goods from one federal state to 
another thus restricting trade and increasing the costs of trading. Low levels of market integration 
and limited control over tax administration in some of the federal states has created parallel tax 
regimes which fracture the internal market. From the survey conducted for this strategy, Somalia 
firms listed the following as the top five barriers they encounter whole exporting – unnecessary 
customs controls (20%); multiple testing agencies (14%); excessive documentation (14%); 
compliance with standards (12%); and unnecessary roadblock and random checks (10%)12.  
● Low level of industrialisation and value addition – most of Somalia’s exports have limited value 
addition. The top export (livestock) constitutes 26% of exports over the last five years. These 
exports are of live animals with minimal value addition. Livestock exports have been vulnerable 
to import bans that trade partners impose during outbreaks of animal diseases, notably the ban 
by Saudi Arabia in 2000–0913. Somalia’s export crops also face the additional challenge of high 
post-harvest losses due to limited processing and storage capacity.   
● Low level of awareness of the AfCFTA – the survey conducted for this strategy revealed that there 
is a very low level of awareness of the AfCFTA in the Somalia business community in Somalia 
compared to its diaspora. The results of the survey indicate that 73% of Somali businesses located 
 
6 Sanctions were imposed to deprive Al Shabab of revenue sources and access to arms. 
7 After seven years of growing resentment over the issue, the ICJ ruled that there was no de facto maritime boundary, effectively rejecting most 
of Kenya’s claims - https://issafrica.org/iss-today/icj-draws-the-line-in-kenya-and-somalias-troubled-waters 
8 Ratification was delayed by the recently concluded presidential elections  
9 WBG (2021) Trade as an Engine of Grow in Somalia: Constraints and Opportunities 
10 Ibid  
11 FGS (2022) AfCFTA perceptions Survey of the Somalia business community 
12 ibid 
13 Ibid
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
7 
 
 
in Somalia had a low level of awareness of the AfCFTA compared to a high level of awareness 
(77%) for Somalia business in the diaspora (Kenya, Uganda, and South Sudan)14.  
● Poor trade infrastructure – The conflict and insecurity in Somalia has negatively impacted its 
trade infrastructure and its ability to effectively connect to the African market. Key road, port and 
air transport infrastructure needs to be upgraded to support the flow of trade between Somalia 
and the RoA. The links between the well-established trade corridors in the region can and should 
be prioritized to open opportunities for trade expansion and diversification.  In the survey, Somali 
firms were asked to indicate what were the key challenges in effective implementation of the 
AfCFTA. Fourteen percent of the firms surveyed indicated that a key challenge would be limited 
shipping lines from Somalia to other African ports; 11% cited inadequate connectivity between 
Somalia and other African markets; 11% highlighted inadequate border infrastructure; and 9% 
mentioned the inadequate air connectivity between Somali and other African countries15. In total, 
45% of the firms surveyed highlighted infrastructure related challenges that would limit their 
access to the African market under the AfCFTA.  
● Lack of requisite trade laws, policies, and regulations – while Somalia has in recent years made 
significant progress in updating its trade laws and regulations more still needs to be done to align 
them to the regional trade agreements it has entered or plan to ratify. To support efforts to 
improve industrial capacity, the currents standards regime and regulations need to be updated. 
The FGS has set up the standards agency which is a positive step however it needs both capacity 
and support in updating the regulatory regime.  
● Limited availability of trade data – this is major constraint to effective trade policy on the AfCFTA. 
The FGS has set up the national statistics agency and made efforts to improve data collection and 
reporting. Nevertheless, there is limited data on the composition of Somalia’s trade, the scale, 
value, and volume of its informal trade and more specifically, limited data on the potential trading 
opportunities in African markets that Somalia could harness of exploit.  
● Inclusive participation in trade – Formal trading in Somalia like in many African countries is 
dominated by men with women, youth, and persons with disabilities (PWDs) relegated to low 
level production or to the informal trade – areas with limited income generation potential. 
Women and youth traders are also less likely to be equipped with the appropriate skills, 
technology and resources that would enable them to benefit from trade liberalization. These 
groups continue to suffer from invisibility, stigmatization, violence, harassment, poor working 
conditions, and a lack of recognition of their economic contribution16. The benefits under the 
Agreement for women and youth are not automatic, and there must be a better understanding 
of what is required at the national and regional levels to enhance women and youth participation 
and beneficiation.17 
 
Intervention pillars  
● Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties – aims to address fast-track the pace 
of ratification of the AfCFTA, FMP, and SAATM. Where relevant implementation activities in this 
pillar should be aligned with the accession to the WTO and the EAC. A two-track process not only 
delivers coherence, but it would also save time.  
 
14 Ibid  
15 FGS (2022) AfCFTA perceptions Survey of the Somalia business community 
16 Ibid  
17 UNDP (2020) The Futures Report – Making the AfCFTA work for women and youth
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
8 
 
 
● Pillar 2: Aligning domestic policy & legislation with AfCFTA - provides a set of interventions that 
Somalia should implement to align its domestic trade policy and legislation with what has been 
negotiated on the AfCFTA – Trade in goods and services, and DSM.  
● Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA– addresses the gaps and opportunities 
identified between the current Somalia regulatory and standards regime with what has thus far 
been negotiated under the AfCFTA.  
● Pillar 4: Upgrade Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa– Identifies opportunities to 
align and link Somalia’s national trade infrastructure with existing trade corridors in the region 
and other market access infrastructure – seaports, airports etc.  
● Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA – Highlights the opportunities 
to increase domestic value addition to key primary products and how these value-added products 
could expand and diversify Somalia’s exports.  
● Pillar 6 -: Enhancing market access & trade facilitation under the AfCFTA – identifies 
opportunities for trade facilitation and market access reforms that would reduce the cost of trade 
and enhance Somalia’s exports to the RoA.  
● Pillar 7 - Strengthening capacity to deliver national AfCFTA implementation strategy – identifies 
capacity and technical assistance required to support the FGS in its efforts to implement AfCFTA 
reforms.  
● Pillar 8 - Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA protocols – Provide the 
evidence base needed to Somalia to develop implementation strategies for phase two protocols. 
● Pillar 9 – Enhancing trade opportunities - covers the analysis of the potential new areas where 
Somalia can enhance its trade and market access opportunities. 
 
For the strategy to deliver inclusive outcomes, implementation needs to consider the mainstreaming of 
the following: 
● Equitable participation by all (women, youth and PWD) – Trade can play an important role in 
creating opportunities for often marginalized groups like women, youth and PWDs to benefit and 
enhance their livelihoods. Nevertheless, is also important to recognize that these groups are often 
left out of trade and if they are involved, they are relegated to aspects of the trade value chain - 
where there are fewer returns or benefits. In implementing this strategy, it is important to 
understand how various barriers that affected these groups and limit their effective participation 
in trade are addressed in every intervention.  
● Embed equitable digitization across all interventions - The success of AfCFTA depends on how 
effectively the continent and members states (in particular) embrace the use of technology and 
digital innovations to simplify trade and reduce the cost of trading. Key technologies like the 
Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Blockchain and Big Data must be central to the 
monitoring and evaluation on the performance of intra-Africa trade. Through these technologies, 
the continent can capture the trade movements across the continent, international trade data 
and capital movements, fiscal statistics and more importantly, food production and consumption, 
to understand the supply chains and exploit the continent’s land and labour resources. Somalia is 
already on the path to digitizing its trade with the implementation of the (i) online trade 
information portal, (ii) the online business registration and licensing system, (iii) the launch of the 
customs revenue systems are all strong signs of the importance the FGS has given to the use of 
technology and digital platforms.  
● Compliance with international practice on safe trade – The covid 19 pandemic highlighted how 
easily trade can be disrupted by global pandemics. In addition, trade reforms that facilitate the 
free movement of people and goods can also be exploited by nefarious entities to undertake 
illegal activities such as smuggling, trafficking of people and drugs, slave labour etc. Somalia has a
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
9 
 
 
significant amount of its trade that is informal especially at its land borders with Kenya, Ethiopia, 
and Djibouti. This trade is important to millions of traders and small business owners and if 
disrupted by illegal activities, then their livelihoods will be significantly impacted. It is therefore 
important that these potential negative effects of trade are considered and adequately addressed 
when implementing this strategy to ensure the smooth flow of trade and its resulting benefits.  
● Embed climate resilience and environmental safeguards in all interventions - Climate change is 
expected to have severe impacts across the globe – rising temperatures and seas, unpredictable 
weather, all of which will severely disrupt economic activity and life as we know it. Most of the 
African economies are still agrarian based and dependent and hence changes in clime will have a 
significant impact. Most Africa agriculture is still rain-fed and hence susceptible to climate 
variability – droughts and floods. Somalia is one of the most climate distressed countries on the 
continent. Over the last 30 years, it has experienced cyclical periods of droughts which have 
affected its agriculture sector on which it depends for trade and incomes for millions of its people. 
As such, it is imperative that the implementation of this AfCFTA and other trade strategies do not 
encourage, and support trade related economic activities that would undermine Somalia’s 
climate resilience and environmental safeguards.  
 
In summary the following are proposed as policy and other actions to be implemented.  
The table 1 below provides a summary of proposed actions for the FGS, MOCI and trade related ministries 
and agencies – and their partners – to consider and implement as part of the efforts to ensure Somalia is 
positioned to maximise the benefits of the AfCFTA while at the same time having a coherent approach to 
minimising the risks.
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
10 
 
 
Somalia National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy - Policy Action Plan  
 
Figure 1: Issues and policy matrix 
Issues identified  
Policy actions  
Somalia trade & macroeconomic situational analysis 
● Chronic and unsustainable trade deficit. This is currently financed by remittance 
flows which are susceptible and vulnerable to global shocks, for example COVID-
19 pandemic.  
● Implementing the AfCFTA will offer Somalia opportunities to expand its access to 
the African market and in turn generate export revenue and taxes to increase its 
domestic revenue collection.  
● Poor domestic resource mobilisation.  
● Trade related reforms, including the implementation of customs systems and trade 
facilitation reforms, should increase domestic revenue collection.  
● Limited exports, with poor export diversification. Somalia’s exports are mainly 
comprised of live animals and raw agricultural goods.   
● Opening of the regional export market through implementation of the AfCFTA, 
targeting specific African export markets for value added exports in livestock and 
agro-processing.  
Private sector knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA 
● EAC is a key African market for both Somali exports and imports.  
● Fast tracking the harmonisation of the Somalia trade regime with the EAC would 
enhance its integration in to the AfCFTA and the continental market.  
● Trade facilitation remains a key barrier both for exporters and importers. Barriers 
include (i) unnecessary customs controls; (ii) multiple testing agencies; (iii) 
excessive data and documents collection; (iv) compliance with standard; and (v) 
unnecessary roadblocks and random checks.  
● FSG working with the private sector to conduct three audits on NTBs that traders 
face when importing or exporting via Road, Air and Sea, coordinated by NTFC. 
● MOCI and relevant bodies to undertake a review of existing trade compliance 
procedures and requirements & mapping of entire importing and exporting journey 
with the view to simplifying and digitising them.  
● Low level of awareness of the AfCFTA and its associated costs and benefits  
● MOCI to develop a civil society education and communications strategy that would 
increase the knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA & EAC.  
● MOCI to work closely with other government ministries and agencies to build 
knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA within the FGS. 
● MOCI to work with private sector representative organisations to continue to build 
awareness and knowledge of the costs and benefits of the AfCFTA. 
● Visa access and air connectivity are critical for Somali companies looking to access 
the African market  
● Develop roadmap for FMP & SAATM ratification to speed up ratification.
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
11 
 
 
● Enhanced access to shipping lines is vital for Somalis to exploit market 
opportunities along the East African Coast and the Indian ocean states.  
● FGS to FastTrack implementation of National Blue Economy Strategy.  
● Targeted and consistent engagement with the private sector.  
● Enhance participation of private sector in NTFC through platforms where specific 
reforms can be discussed and implemented with private sector input on trade and 
industrial policy.  
Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties 
● Somalia is yet to ratify the AfCFTA agreement by depositing the instruments of 
the ratification with the AUC 
● FGS to Fasttrack ratification process in the parliament  
● Somalia has signed the FMP Protocol but has not made progress to move to 
ratification. Somalia needs to make the case for FMP ratification. Where there are 
concerns, these need to be addressed and the benefits of ratification outlined to 
facilitate the process. 
● Develop roadmap for FGS ratification  
● A study to model the costs and benefits of ratification of the FMP – full, partial, and 
non-ratification. These will help policy makers at all levels fully internalize the 
opportunity cost of non-ratification. 
● FGS Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation to implement a strategy 
to push for visa reciprocity that would open effective visa liberalisation between 
Somalia and the rest of Africa.  
● Somalia is ranked as one of the least compliant countries with regards to the 
implementation of the SATAAM protocol and liberalization measures  
● FGS and SCAA Authority should work with AFCAC to create greater awareness of 
the SAATM  
● MoCI, Ministry of Transport & Aviation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International 
Cooperation to develop action plan to develop National Aviation/Air transport 
policy 
● Somalia has no aviation competition and consumer protection legislation which is 
a prerequisite for SATAAM implementation  
● FGS and SCAA to work with AFAC to seek support in developing the aviation 
competition and consumer protection legislation  
● Limited understanding of the costs and benefits of liberalizing the Somalia air 
transport market  
● SCAA to undertake an assessment of the costs and benefits of liberalizing the 
Somali aviation sector to promote increased intra-African connectivity and travel  
Pillar 2: Aligning Domestic policy and legislation with AfCFTA 
● Multiplicity of customs codes across Somalia’s federal states which prevents 
effective trade facilitation and harmonisation with the rest of Africa 
● Map custom codes and custom processes differences across federal states and seek 
to harmonise codes, systems, and procedures 
● Not clear that Somalia’s new customs code is harmonised with AfCFTA tariff 
regime 
● Ministry of Finance, Revenue Department, to map and harmonise unified Somali 
customs code with EAC and AfCFTA frameworks and a pathway to AfCFTA tariff 
harmonisation
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
12 
 
 
● AfCFTA lists of the sensitive and excluded products yet to be agreed hence an 
opportunity for Somalia to engage and influence the negotiations  
● MoCI to develop a schedule of sensitive and excluded product lines for the AfCFTA, 
in consultation with federal state government agencies and the private sector 
● The treatment of intermediate goods under the AfCFTA is not yet clear.  
● FGS to review its new industrial strategy to clarify it would be affected should 
agreements be reached on the treatment of intermediate goods in the AfCFTA.   
● Lack of customs systems interconnectivity may hamper the trade with RoA 
● SOMCAS to be connected to regional customs systems to facilitate smooth customs 
trade and data sharing with will reduce customs revenue leakages  
● Numerous NTBs have been identified in the perception survey  
● Implementation digital platforms that monitor and facilitate trade. Systems like the 
electronic single window, electronic cargo tracking, NTB monitoring and resolution 
platforms. 
● Gaps in harmonisation of Somalia’s trade legislation with regional and 
international frameworks 
a) 
Trade in goods & services   
b) 
IP, competition, investment, digital trade, and women & youth 
● There is limited awareness and lack of capacity & technical expertise across 
government to deliver on the above.  
● Comprehensive mapping of current trade legislation against the various agreements 
that Somalia is negotiating (WTO, EAC, COMESA, AfCFTA)  
● Underdeveloped policies & strategies and implementation (trade, industrial 
strategy, investment)  
● Mapping status and gaps of existing policies and strategies  
● MOCI to publish to other government departments the strategies that they have 
developed to aid cross-ministerial cooperation. 
● Initiate consultation process on current and new policies/strategy reforms across 
government. 
● Coordination & harmonisation of policy and strategy implementation to achieve 
coherency across government  
● Underdeveloped incentive frameworks to promote trade & industrialisation 
● Comprehensive study to map current incentives to promote trade & 
industrialisation with a specific focus on gaps that need to be addressed  
● Limited evidence to support development of good policy & legislation, with 
disparate trade related databases 
● Develop a roadmap on how trade related government bodies can improve the 
collection, reporting and access to trade data  
● Limited awareness of existing policy & legislation 
● Develop action plan on how to increase awareness of trade policy and reforms 
across all segments of society  
● Somalia can adopt & benefit from tried and tested trade policy & legislation in the 
region & ease of harmonisation with already established trade frameworks 
● Compile examples of good policy & practice that has delivered improved trade & 
industrial performance in the region
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
13 
 
 
● Significant interest from international & donor community to support policy and 
legislation reform  
● MOCI to develop a costed trade reform action plan to be shared with potential 
development partners/donors interested in supporting trade related reforms, using 
MoCI annual workplan 
Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA 
● Current trade related regulation and standards lag regional & international good 
practice. 
 
● Map gaps between domestic and African standards (with ARSO & ASO)  
● Prioritise harmonisation of Somali standards with regional standards – upon EAC 
accession, Somalia will be able to adopt EAC standards as a member state 
● Underdeveloped domestic standards to facilitate internal trade 
● MOCI & SOBS to undertake a common-sense assessment of what a domestic 
standards regime should look like to facilitate value addition  
● Limited capacity within established trade regulation & standards agencies to 
develop & administer regulations and standards 
● SOBS to identify technical assistance required to develop and regulate Somalia’s 
domestic & international standards regime.  
● Fastrack full ISO membership  
● Expand scope of support from ARSO, beyond technical assistance 
● Limited evidence base to support development of regulations and standards 
● Develop a repository of standards regulations and related data that would facilitate 
reforms  
● Limited awareness of existing regulations & standards 
● SOBS to push standards agenda within government by publishing quarterly updates 
on progress being made on standards reforms & hosting national conferences with 
key stakeholders.  
● SOBS to increase awareness of standards reforms and compliance to private sector 
– providing regular workshops with traders. 
● Somalia National Quality Infrastructure policy is currently under development  
● Develop sector specific action plan to implement the Somalia National Quality 
Infrastructure policy  
● SOBS is not yet accredited and requires technical assistance to achieve 
accreditation  
● Develop a roadmap outlining the reforms and investment required to upgrade SOBS 
labs to meet international accreditation standards. 
● Develop a human resource gaps analysis & action plan to build domestic technical 
capacity to implement both domestic and international standards 
● Somalia in a position to benefit from and adopt tried and tested regulations and 
standards & ease of harmonisation with already established trade frameworks 
● Request examples of good policy & practice that has delivered improved standards 
and regulation in the region from ASSO & ASO  
Pillar 4: Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa 
● No specific prioritization of trade infrastructure in the SNIS 2019-2063 
● MOCI to work with key ministries involved in infrastructure planning to identify 
infrastructure needs to facilitate regional trade from existing policy framework 
(SNIS 2019- 2063; Somalia TSNA & Investment Programme)
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
14 
 
 
● Insecurity along Somalia’s traditional trade routes increases costs and limits 
opportunities.  
● Map key security related bottlenecks in Somalia’s main trade routes/corridors  
● Diaspora has shown interest in supporting Somalia’s growth however there is no 
concerted efforts to tap into their expertise.  
● Explore opportunities to build domestic capacity, including diaspora investment, to 
participate in infrastructure development/upgrading/rehabilitation 
● Somalia needs to enhance its road infrastructure connectivity to established 
regional trade corridors  
● identify gaps in Somalia’s infrastructure connectivity with established regional trade 
corridors and develop action plan to connect developing regional trade corridors 
with Somalia 
● No clear estimation of the cost and value of trade infrastructure needed to 
improve access to markets 
● MOCI to work with key ministries involved in infrastructure planning to draw from 
SNIS 2019- 2063 and Somalia TSNA & Investment Programme to quantify regional 
trade related infrastructure gaps 
● Somalia’s main port is rapidly reaching its full capacity utilization. Other ports 
around the country are underdeveloped and yet they have significant potential  
● MOCI to work with main port authorities, & key industries involved in infrastructure 
planning, to identify opportunities to maximise utilisation of existing ports 
● No available mapping of potential strategies for trade infrastructure 
development.  
● MOCI & key industries involved in infrastructure planning to identify potential and 
existing partners that will support development/upgrading/rehabilitation of its 
regional trade related infrastructure  
Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA 
● Industrial strategy has been developed however it lacks and implementation 
action plan  
● MoCI to develop an action plan to implement recommendations in existing 
industrial strategy  
● There is an ongoing push to support industrialisation. This would require the 
divesture of government owned industrial assets. There is no PPP law that would 
provide an alternative option to outright sale of these assets  
● MoCI to fast-track development of Somalia PPP law with a view to facilitating the 
disposal of redundant state industrial assets. 
● Feedback from new investors in the industrial sector indicate the lack of 
awareness of the incentives available to them  
● Operationalise incentives national investment policy that would drive FDI & DDI 
towards industrialisation, including SEZs 
● Industrial strategy does not clearly articulate the approach to tapping into 
regional value chains  
● Assessment of how Somalia’s industries could be linked into regional value chains 
so to access technology and expand industrial capacity that generates growth 
across sectors, including SEZs 
● There is little or no data on industrial output that would facilitate decision making 
especially in relation to incentives for the sector 
● Develop framework that enhances industrial data collection that will facilitate 
implementation of policy and strategies
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
15 
 
 
● No existing strategy to guide value addition in the agriculture and livestock sector 
● Develop a national agro-processing strategy linked to off-setting imports and 
expanding value added exports in sectors where Somalia has a comparative 
advantage (livestock, fisheries)  
● Somalia doesn’t have a strategy that would guide its policy to reduce its trade 
deficit and its policy to increase domestic industrial capacity 
● Identify opportunities for import substitution that could be addressed through 
industrial policy and strategies 
● There are opportunities for Somalia to export value added goods in agriculture, 
livestock, and fisheries. These opportunities need to be assessed and 
communicated to the private sector.  
● Identify opportunities where Somalia has a comparative advantage in exporting 
value added goods  
Pillar 6: Market access and trade facilitation 
● Significant NTBs and NTMs (non-tariff measures) in Somalia’s internal and 
domestic, regional & ROW & no mechanism in place to monitor NTBs & NTMs 
(reporting & addressing) 
● Diagnostic study on NTBs & NTMs affecting Somalia’s trade  
● Develop a digital framework for reporting and resolving NTBs  
● Establish NTB monitoring committee as a sub-set of NTFC (including port, airport, 
revenue and customs, border force, and security authorities) 
● High cost of trade – transportation, procedures  
● Audit to ascertain the true cost of trading across Somalia’s borders (land, air, and 
sea)  
● High levels of informal trade with immediate neighbours  
● Ascertain value, levels, and composition of informal trade with Somalia’s immediate 
neighbours.  
● Develop a simplified trade regime (STR) to support ICBT 
● Lack of data on ICBT  
● Develop framework for collecting and reporting ICBT data at land borders 
● Enforcement and compliance with domestic regional and international trade 
standards 
● Harmonising domestic, regional, and continental standards to facilitate Somalia’s 
market access  
● High cost of market entry and high cost of trade facilitation, with lack of data to 
support market access strategies and address trade facilitation barriers 
● Undertake assessment of the costs of accessing new markets in the region (Indian 
Ocean States – Mauritius, Seychelles, and Madagascar, and states on East African 
coastlines – Mozambique and Tanzania)  
● Established digital trade information portal addressing trade facilitation barriers  
● Expand existing trade information portal to provide a framework for identifying 
trade facilitation barriers 
● Established framework for trade facilitation coordination  
● Strengthen the mandate and decision-making power of Somalia’s National Trade 
Facilitation Committee (NTFC) 
Pillar 7: Strengthening capacity to deliver Somalia’s National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
16 
 
 
● Consultations indicate that FGS will need support to enhance its capacity and 
capability to negotiate the phase 2 protocols 
● Identify capacity gaps linked to Phase II AfCFTA negotiations.  
● Enhance and widen training on trade related policy across FGS ministries and 
agencies 
● The NTFC needs technical assistance to strengthen its ability to coordinate trade 
reforms across government and the private sector  
● Seek funding to support technical assistance to the NTFC 
● No centralized or digitized trade data reporting framework 
● MOCI to work with National Bureau of Statistics to develop a digitised & centralised 
reporting framework for trade data  
●  
● Identify diaspora trade, investment, and industrialisation expertise to facilitate 
Somalia’s implementation of national and AfCFTA trade strategies  
●  
● Identify opportunities to leverage African regional integration experts to support 
the implementation of Somalia’s AfCFTA National Strategy 
●  
● Identify prioritised technical assistance gaps that could be funded by the 
donor/international community  
Pillar 8: Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA Protocols 
● Current IP law & regulatory framework is outdated  
● Develop IP policy strategy and legal framework  
● No entity in place to regulate and manage IP  
● Assess most appropriate entity to regulate the sector, learning from regional 
examples 
● Awareness of AfCFTA IP protocol across FGS  
● MOCI organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to 
validate its IP negotiating paper   
● Implementation of the AfCFTA IP protocol  
● Identify IP priorities that would a) inform Somalia’s IP policy and strategy b) support 
the development of both institutional and regulatory IP frameworks 
● FIL is established (legal framework) and investment policy & strategies are under 
development, but no clear roadmap on how these will be aligned to the AfCFTA 
protocol on investment 
● Develop an AfCFTA investment strategy paper focused on intra-African FDI 
opportunities  
● No current specific or articulated strategy to attract Somali diaspora in Africa to 
invest 
● Ensure that Somalia’s National Diaspora Policy (SNDP-22) includes a chapter on 
attracting investment form its diaspora in Africa for strategy development.  
● Fastrack development of Somalia Diaspora Investment Policy  
● Awareness of AfCFTA investment protocol across FGS  
● MOCI to organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to 
validate its AfCFTA investment strategy
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
17 
 
 
● Implementation of the AFCFTA investment protocol   
● Identify investment priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s investment 
frameworks and what is being proposed under the AfCFTA  
● No competition law and related regulatory framework 
● Develop competition legislation & regulation  
● Awareness of AfCFTA competition protocol across FGS  
● MoCI organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to 
validate its competition strategy   
● Implementation of the AfCFTA competition protocol 
● Identify competition priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s competition 
priorities and what has been agreed under the AfCFTA competition protocol  
● There is no e-commerce policy, strategy, and law but they are currently being 
drafted  
● Develop an AfCFTA digital trade protocol strategy focused on digital trade 
opportunities in Africa 
● Awareness of AfCFTA digital trade protocol across FGS  
● MOCI & MOCT to organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside 
government to validate its digital trade strategy   
● Implementation of the AfCFTA Digital trade Protocol 
● Identify digital priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s digital trade priorities 
and what is being proposed under the AfCFTA  
● No specific or articulated policy & strategy to address participation of women and 
youth in trade (formal & ICBT) 
● Develop an AfCFTA women and youth in trade protocol position paper focused on 
opportunities to improve the participation of women and youth in trade in Africa 
(formal & ICBT)  
● Implementation of the AfCFTA Women and Youth in trade protocol  
● Identify women and youth in trade priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s 
priorities and develop a strategy  
Pillar 9: Enhancing trade opportunities   
● National Blue Economy Strategy is in place but needs an Action plan and 
coordination forum to ensure its effective implementation  
● Develop a BES action plan and set up an institutional coordination platform that will 
oversee the implementation of reforms contained in the strategy  
● Current Somalia port infrastructure needs investment to order to improve 
functionality and efficiency. The port at Mogadishu is rapidly reaching its 
operational capacity   
● FGS needs to develop a national port development strategy that prioritises the 
investment required; investment options i.e., PPP etc, and operational models 
● Somalia’s shipping sector is underdeveloped with low levels of investment. 
Somalia had not developed a national shipping line that would enhance its access 
to the African continent and trade 
● FGS to develop a national shipping development strategy that would help guide and 
incentivise investment in the sector  
● Somalia doesn’t have a systematic record of marine information critical to guiding 
and informing policy development and reforms that would unlock its maritime 
resource potential  
● FGS to develop a comprehensive maritime database that will allow the collection of 
several maritime indicators as well as a comprehensive resource base where data 
for both natural and human capital aspects are to be evaluated and quantified.
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
18 
 
 
● Somalia’s BE potential affected by insecurity and risk perceptions. Maritime 
border disputes are constraining the ability to exploit its maritime resources 
● Improve regional peace and security: This will foster the development of all the Blue 
Economy 
● sectors, including easing tensions linked to maritime boundaries. 
● Limited value addition in the key blue economy subsectors specifically fishing. 
Most of Somalis fish exports have little or no value add.  
● FGS to develop a value addition strategy that would guide investments by both the 
public and private sector to maximise the value addition capacity and capability in 
Somalia’s fishing sector  
● Capacity constraints within the marine and shipping sectors undermines the 
ability to implement good governance 
● FGS to seek support from international maritime agencies willing to help build the 
capacity of its blue economy ministries and agencies  
● Somalia’s tourism potential is limited by security concerns and the lack of 
appropriate infrastructure  
● Developing strong inter-sectoral linkages is necessary to ensure greater capture of 
tourists’ expenditures. This will facilitate the transfer of economic benefits from the 
sector to the local communities thereby contributing to improved livelihoods and 
poverty reduction 
● Industrial policy is in place, however, there is no strategy to guide 
implementation  
● MoCI develop an industrialisation strategy that operationalises the recently 
developed industrial policy 
● The industrial policy alluded to promoting Made in Somalia however, there is no 
specific strategy on how this objective will be achieved 
● MoCI to develop a domestic market recapture strategy that clearly outlines how the 
Made in Somalia will be operationalised  
● No local content policy to drive local value addition   
● Develop a national local content strategy that will develop an incentive structure 
for local value addition 
● SEZ Act is in place but it’s not clear whether there is a policy of strategy to guide 
and drive implementation. 
● Develop SEZ Policy and Strategy  
● No diagnostic of which sectors and product lines will be prioritised in the 
domestic industrial promotion  
● Undertake a study to inform the prioritisation of sectors and product lines that 
would form the basis for the investor attraction  
● Somalia does not have an ICBT policy or strategy and yet a significant amount of 
trade takes place at this informal level  
● MoCI to develop ICBT policy and strategy  
● There is very little data on cross border trade which limits the development of 
effective policies to guide the trade and maximise the benefits for all  
● MoCI to work with relevant federal states and FGS ministries and agencies to agree 
a farmework for collecting and reporting ICBT data 
 
● Strengthen/establish ICBT data collection and analytical capacities at key border 
points to gauge ICBTs contribution to the economy.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
19 
 
 
● It’s not clear that any simplified trade regime is in operation at the key border 
points where ICBT trade is taking place – Somalia’s borders with Kenya, Ethiopia 
and Djibouti 
● MoCI to review regional STRs and their applicability at the relevant borders to 
facilitate trade.  
● Women and youth continue to face challenges in trading across borders  
● Prioritize a gender and youth-based approach to ICBT which address some of the 
pervasive constraints that afflict women and youth participation in trade. 
● Intensification of cross border policy dialogue will build an understanding of local 
cross border dynamics. 
● Mainstream ICBT in national and regional economic policy dialogues. 
● Cross border payments systems remain a challenge  
● The promotion of suitable financing solutions is of critical importance for informal 
and small-scale traders. Traders without bank accounts are often locked out of 
formal processes. Electronic payment systems for cross-border payments can cut 
the security risks for informal traders and represent an opportunity to formalise 
trade. 
Cross Cutting Pillar interventions  
● Ensure equal participation of women in AfCFTA national coordinating & oversight 
structures.  
 
● Consult and ensure the equal participation of women-led organisations across 
sectors in all AfCFTA national coordinating structures, including inter alia National 
AfCFTA Committee, charged with coordinating AfCFTA implementation across 
Government & National Trade Facilitation Committee. 
● Build the export and trading capacity of women-led business in the AfCFTA 
 
 
● Develop and implement AfCFTA export-ready capacity development and training 
programmes for women entrepreneurs. 
● Design context-specific business and entrepreneurship management programmes 
to strengthen women’s entrepreneurial skills, including through business 
development, leadership, mentorship, and networking. 
● Empower women in regional value chains, corporate supply chains and public 
procurement 
● Prioritize opportunities for women in high-value regional value chains: understand 
the terms of involvement for women by conducting gender-focused sectoral value 
chain analysis to determine with accuracy where women and men are in various 
segments of the value chain. 
● Improve access to education, specialized skills, vocational and on-the-job training 
that respond to identified causes of persistent gender-occupational segregation. 
● Explore public-private sector partnerships that connect women-owned SMEs to 
regional markets by becoming certified suppliers of corporate supply chains.  
● Design gender-responsive public procurement policies that integrate women-
owned businesses in public procurement supply chains.
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
20 
 
 
● Close the gender gap in access to finance  
 
 
● Improve women-owned businesses access to finance to grow their businesses, 
including through a range of innovative financing instruments ranging from micro-
loans to venture capital. 
● Collaborate with financial institutions to provide low-interest loans for women 
entrepreneurs. Collaborate with commercial and microfinance banks and other 
partners on digital financial services and products.  
● Design and implement a gender-responsive trade facilitation agenda (including 
digital trade facilitation) 
● Identify trade facilitation measures to improve the safety and boost the 
participation, especially of women traders, in small-scale cross-border trade. 
Measures could include improved security lighting as well as “at the border” 
infrastructure, such as proper storage, health, and sanitary facilities.  Implement 
gender sensitive training to customs officers and border officials at ports of entry 
and exit. 
● Improved access to e-commerce and digital trade solutions 
● Develop and expand ICT and digital infrastructure. 
● Support women’s participation in e-commerce through bridging the gender digital 
divide and addressing digital illiteracy and lack of digital skills as one of the main 
drivers of the gender digital divide, and a particular constraint to women’s 
participation in ecommerce. 
● Implement digital trade solutions, including e-transactions and e-payments, to 
improve efficiency in cross-border trade. Online payments such as mobile apps for 
small-scale cross-border traders, e-logistics, and e-legislation are examples of digital 
trade solutions proposed to improve efficiency in cross-border trade. 
● Implement digital literacy, education, and skills to support the equal participation of 
women entrepreneurs, small-scale and informal cross border traders in digital trade 
platforms to facilitate intra-African trade. 
● Somalia does not have legislation to regulate data and consumer protection, data 
transfer, cybersecurity, and electronic transactions. 
● Need to Fasttrack Somalia’s   digital economy legislation. 
● Somalia does not have a digital market strategy or E-Commerce strategy  
● Align the development of digital market strategy or E-commerce strategy with 
development on the digital trade protocol of the AfCFTA 
● Climate change poses a significant risk to the Somalia’s ability to expand 
agriculture and livestock production  
● MOCI to work with the relevant ministries to develop a strategy on how production 
can be expanded without causing adverse effects on arable land and rangelands  
● Scaling up agriculture crop production may increase water insecurity   
● MOCI to work with relevant ministries, agencies and private sector to introduce 
technology that can conserve water or plant varieties that are less water intensive
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
21 
 
 
 
Contents 
Foreword ....................................................................................................................................................... 0 
Acknowledgements ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
List of abbreviations ...................................................................................................................................... 2 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
Opportunities identified ........................................................................................................................... 4 
Constraints to be addressed. .................................................................................................................... 5 
Intervention pillars .................................................................................................................................... 7 
Somalia National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy - Policy Action Plan ............................................... 10 
List of tables ................................................................................................................................................ 25 
List of figures ............................................................................................................................................... 26 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................ 27 
Objectives of the Somalia AfCFTA National Implementation Strategy ............................................... 27 
AfCFTA situational analysis ......................................................................................................................... 27 
Historical context .................................................................................................................................... 27 
The significance of the African Continental Free Trade Area ............................................................. 28 
Key features of the AfCFTA ..................................................................................................................... 28 
What it covers – protocols and annexes ............................................................................................. 29 
Status of ratification and implementation .............................................................................................. 30 
Somalia – AfCFTA: Situational Analysis ....................................................................................................... 31 
Context .................................................................................................................................................... 31 
Macroeconomic context ......................................................................................................................... 32 
Key features of Somalia’s current growth model ............................................................................... 32 
Governance structure and trade ecosystem .......................................................................................... 33 
Trade performance ............................................................................................................................. 34 
Investment .......................................................................................................................................... 40 
Policy Actions ..................................................................................................................................... 41 
Table 5 below outlines the emerging key issues and proposed policy actions. ..................................... 41 
Somalia – AfCFTA: Private Sector Perceptions of the AfCFTA .................................................................... 42 
Objectives and scope of the survey ........................................................................................................ 42 
Coverage of the survey ........................................................................................................................... 42 
Survey characteristics ............................................................................................................................. 42
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
22 
 
 
Key results from the survey .................................................................................................................... 45 
Balance of trade .................................................................................................................................. 45 
Exporters perspective ......................................................................................................................... 45 
Importer’s perspective ........................................................................................................................ 48 
Import barriers identified ................................................................................................................... 48 
Trading firms’ awareness of the AfCFTA ............................................................................................. 50 
Perceptions of opportunities and challenges of the AfCFTA .............................................................. 50 
Sources of Information of the AfCFTA ................................................................................................ 54 
Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA .................................................................................... 55 
How should FGS engage with the private sector? .............................................................................. 56 
Policy Actions: .................................................................................................................................... 57 
Vision of the strategy .................................................................................................................................. 60 
Mission of the strategy ............................................................................................................................... 60 
Objectives of the strategy ........................................................................................................................... 60 
Theory of change (ToC) ............................................................................................................................... 60 
Key Opportunities ................................................................................................................................... 61 
Key Challenges ........................................................................................................................................ 63 
Intervention pillars .................................................................................................................................. 65 
Cross cutting themes .............................................................................................................................. 66 
Outputs ................................................................................................................................................... 67 
Outcome statements .............................................................................................................................. 68 
Impact statements .................................................................................................................................. 70 
Assumptions at impact and outcome levels ........................................................................................... 71 
Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties ....................................................................... 72 
AfCFTA Ratification ................................................................................................................................. 72 
FMP Ratification ...................................................................................................................................... 72 
The Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM) ................................................................................. 73 
Somalia Perspective ............................................................................................................................ 73 
Policy Actions .......................................................................................................................................... 74 
Pillar 2: Aligning Domestic policy and legislation with AfCFTA ................................................................... 77 
Status of trade in goods .......................................................................................................................... 77 
Tariffs .................................................................................................................................................. 77 
Rules of Origin ..................................................................................................................................... 77
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
23 
 
 
Trade facilitation ................................................................................................................................. 78 
Status of trade in services ....................................................................................................................... 80 
Somalia trade in services ........................................................................................................................ 80 
Policy Actions ...................................................................................................................................... 81 
Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA ................................................................................ 85 
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the AfCFTA .............................................................................. 85 
Institutional framework for harmonisation at continental level ........................................................ 85 
The Somalia perspective ......................................................................................................................... 86 
Constraints .......................................................................................................................................... 86 
Opportunities ...................................................................................................................................... 86 
Pillar 4: Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa ...................................................................... 89 
Situational analysis.................................................................................................................................. 89 
National Infrastructure Strategy & needs assessment ....................................................................... 89 
Infrastructure financing ...................................................................................................................... 89 
Trade related constraints ........................................................................................................................ 90 
Antiquated & delipidated trade infrastructure. .................................................................................. 90 
Poor regional connectivity .................................................................................................................. 91 
Significant infrastructure funding deficit ............................................................................................ 91 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA ............................................................................................................ 91 
Regional trade corridors...................................................................................................................... 91 
Underutilised deep seaports ............................................................................................................... 92 
Financing infrastructure development programmes .......................................................................... 92 
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes ................................................................... 93 
Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA ........................................................... 95 
Industrialisation in the AfCFTA ............................................................................................................... 95 
Situational analysis.................................................................................................................................. 95 
Trade related constraints .................................................................................................................... 96 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA ........................................................................................................ 98 
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes ................................................................... 100 
Pillar 6: Market access and trade facilitation ............................................................................................ 102 
Importance of market access ................................................................................................................ 102 
Importance of trade facilitation ............................................................................................................ 102 
The Somalia perspective ....................................................................................................................... 103
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
24 
 
 
Constraints ........................................................................................................................................ 103 
Opportunities .................................................................................................................................... 103 
Pillar 7: Strengthening capacity to deliver Somalia’s National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy ........... 108 
Situational analysis................................................................................................................................ 108 
Trade related constraints ...................................................................................................................... 108 
Limited capacity in trade related functions ...................................................................................... 108 
Limited trade coordination platform (National Trade Facilitation Committee) ............................... 108 
Lack of/underdeveloped centralised trade repository ...................................................................... 109 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA .......................................................................................................... 109 
Access to technical experts & significant donor interest to support capacity building..................... 109 
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes ....................................................................... 109 
Pillar 8: Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA Protocols ..................................... 111 
Intellectual Property Rights Protocol .................................................................................................... 111 
Intellectual property in the AfCFTA .................................................................................................. 111 
Why the IPR protocol is important ................................................................................................... 112 
FGS approach on intellectual property ............................................................................................. 112 
Private sector perceptions on intellectual property ......................................................................... 113 
Investment Protocol ............................................................................................................................. 114 
Investment in the AfCFTA ................................................................................................................. 115 
FGS approach on investment ............................................................................................................ 116 
Private sector perceptions on investment ........................................................................................ 116 
Competition Protocol ............................................................................................................................ 118 
Competition in the AfCFTA ............................................................................................................... 118 
FGS approach on competition .......................................................................................................... 119 
Private sector perceptions on competition ...................................................................................... 119 
Digital Trade Protocol ........................................................................................................................... 121 
Digital trade in the AfCFTA ................................................................................................................ 121 
Why digital trade is important .......................................................................................................... 121 
FGS on digital trade & its importance to Somalia ............................................................................. 122 
Private sector perceptions on digital trade ...................................................................................... 123 
Women and Youth in Trade Protocol ................................................................................................... 124 
Women and Youth in Trade in the AfCFTA ....................................................................................... 124 
FGS on Women and Youth in Trade .................................................................................................. 125
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
25 
 
 
Pillar 9: Enhancing trade opportunities .................................................................................................... 126 
The Blue Economy..................................................................................................................................... 126 
The African Blue Economy .................................................................................................................... 126 
The AfCFTA and the Blue Economy ....................................................................................................... 126 
Blue Economy under IGAD .................................................................................................................... 127 
Somalia’s Blue Economy Strategy ......................................................................................................... 127 
Issues and policy recommendations ..................................................................................................... 129 
Industrialization .................................................................................................................................... 131 
Industrialisation in the AfCFTA ........................................................................................................ 131 
Somalia industrialisation perspective ............................................................................................. 131 
Issues and policy actions ....................................................................................................................... 132 
Informal Cross border trade ................................................................................................................. 133 
ICBT in the AfCFTA ............................................................................................................................ 134 
ICBT in IGAD ...................................................................................................................................... 134 
Cross cutting theme – Inclusion - women youth and PWD ...................................................................... 137 
Inclusion in the AfCFTA ......................................................................................................................... 137 
Somalia perspective .............................................................................................................................. 138 
Women in trade ................................................................................................................................ 139 
Youth in trade ................................................................................................................................... 139 
Inclusive participation ....................................................................................................................... 139 
Cross cutting theme – Leveraging Technology ......................................................................................... 142 
Importance of digitization ..................................................................................................................... 142 
Somalia perspective .......................................................................................................................... 142 
Cross cutting theme - Climate and environment ...................................................................................... 145 
Climate and trade ................................................................................................................................. 145 
Climate in the AfCFTA ....................................................................................................................... 145 
Somalia Perspective .......................................................................................................................... 145 
Cross cutting theme – Safe trade .............................................................................................................. 147 
Trade and human rights ........................................................................................................................ 147 
Trade and pandemics ............................................................................................................................ 147 
Results framework .................................................................................................................................... 148 
Monitoring & Evaluation and Learning ..................................................................................................... 149 
Communication and visibility framework ................................................................................................. 150
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
26 
 
 
Communicating reforms in the strategy ............................................................................................... 150 
Improving awareness of the AfCFTA within Somalia ............................................................................ 150 
Budget Framework.................................................................................................................................... 151 
Approach to funding the strategy ......................................................................................................... 151 
Risk management framework ................................................................................................................... 159 
Institutional arrangements for the implementation ................................................................................ 160 
Continental level governance ............................................................................................................... 160 
Regional level governance .................................................................................................................... 161 
National level governance .................................................................................................................... 161 
Role of cabinet .................................................................................................................................. 161 
Role of MOCI ..................................................................................................................................... 161 
Role of National Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC) ..................................................................... 161 
Implementation Mechanism. ............................................................................................................ 162 
Somalia AfCFTA National Strategy Action Plan ......................................................................................... 163 
Commissioned by the Federal Government of Somalia ......................................................................... 170 
Funded by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa ........................................................... 170 
Written by Vanguard Economics Ltd ....................................................................................................... 170
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
27 
 
 
List of tables  
Table 1: Coverage of the AfCFTA 
29 
Table 2: Somalia's National Income and Prices, 2017- 2021 (USD Millions) 
32 
Table 3: Somalia's trade ecosystem 
34 
Table 4: Somalia’s Balance of Payments, 2019-2027 
35 
Table 5: Composition & value of exports 2017-2021 (USD thousand) 
36 
Table 6: Somalia's sources of African investment (2010-2022) 
40 
Table 7: Somalia trade & macroeconomic situational analysis 
41 
Table 8: Private sector knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA 
57 
Table 9: Ratification policy actions 
75 
Table 10: Trade in goods policy actions 
81 
Table 11: Mapping constraints and opportunities - policy and legislation 
83 
Table 12: Constraints and opportunities - Standards 
87 
Table 13: Somalia Infrastructure Funding Projects 
90 
Table 14: Current condition of Somalia's land, air & sea infrastructure 
91 
Table 15: Horn of Africa trade corridors 
92 
Table 16: Infrastructure financing opportunities 
92 
Table 17: Infrastructure Policy Action, Outputs, and Outcomes 
93 
Table 18:Key value addition & diversification opportunities for exports 
98 
Table 19: Enhanced Industrial Capacity Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
100 
Table 20: African trade with RoW versus intra-african trade 
102 
Table 21: examples of the Impact of trade facilitation reforms 
104 
Table 22: Proposed policy interventions - Market access and trade facilitation 
106 
Table 23: Capacity & Coordination Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
109 
Table 24: IPRs Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
113 
Table 25: Table 26: Investment Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes
 
117 
Table 27: Competition Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
120 
Table 28: Digital Trade Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
123 
Table 29: Women & Youth in Trade Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & 
Outcomes 
125 
List of figures 
Figure 1: AfCFTA Governance structure 
25 
Figure 2: Exports and Imports of goods and services 2012-2022 (% of GDP) 
31 
Figure 3: Composition of exports (percent of total exports), 2021 
34 
Figure 4: Composition of imports (percent of total imports), 2021 
35 
Figure 5: Somalia’s African export markets composition, 2021 
36 
Figure 6 Survey Sample Characteristics 
41 
Figure 7: Type of trade activity (including by location) 
42 
Figure 8: Somali businesses key export destinations (including by location) 
43 
Figure 9: Experience in exporting to RoA 
43 
Figure 10: Restrictions / barriers encountered while exporting 
44
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
28 
 
 
Figure 11: Trade restriction / barriers affecting diaspora exports to Somalia 
44 
Figure 12:Export barriers by location 
44 
Figure 13: Somali businesses key import sources (including by location) 
45 
Figure 14: Experience in importing (including by location) 
45 
Figure 15: Import barriers identified 
46 
Figure 16: import barriers identified by location 
47 
Figure 17: Awareness of the AfCFTA (incl by location) 
47 
Figure 18: Perceptions of the opportunities under the AfCFTA 
48 
Figure 19: Perceptions of the opportunities under the AfCFTA by location 
49 
Figure 20: Perceptions of the challenges under the AfCFTA (incl by location) 
50 
Figure 21: Perceptions of the challenges under the AfCFTA by location 
50 
Figure 22: Sources of information of the AfCFTA 
51 
Figure 23: Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA (incl location) 
52 
Figure 24: Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA by location 
54 
Figure 25: Private sector preferences for AfCFTA engagement 
55 
Figure 26 Proposed Theory of Change 
60 
Figure 27: Status of the ratification of the FMP – Somalia 
70 
Figure 28: Summary of BASA Compliance with YD per state 
72 
Figure 29: NTBs identified affecting export trade 
77 
Figure 30: Ease of import or export trade 
77 
Figure 31: Sectors attracting the most FDI (% of total Capex 2010 - 2022) 
95 
Figure 32: Private sector perceived importance of IP Protocol 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Figure 33: Private sector perceived importance of Investment Protocol  
115 
Figure 34: Private sector perceived importance of Competition Protocol 
Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Figure 35: Private sector perceived importance of digital trade protocol 
Error! Bookmark not defined.
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
29 
 
 
Somalia AfCFTA Implementation Strategy  
Introduction 
Objectives of the Somalia AfCFTA National Implementation Strategy  
There are five objectives outlined for the implementation of the strategy:;  
● Provide a framework through which the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) will support and 
facilitate the implementation of the AfCFTA across the Federal Republic of Somalia (hereinafter 
referred to as Somalia).  
● Assess whether the structural and legal reforms within the Federal Republic of Somalia are 
adequate to effectively implement the AfCFTA agreement and identify what changes may be 
required. 
● Highlight the constraints, gaps, and opportunities to the alignment of the FGS and AfCFTA trade 
frameworks that would unlock (i) market opportunities; (ii) prioritization of sectors/industry 
clusters and products for trade; and (iii) regional value chains development 
● Provide strategic and policy recommendations on how best to improve the implementation of the 
AfCFTA within the Federal Republic of Somalia, with a view to promoting trade performance, 
competitiveness, digitalization and investments. 
● Develop an implementation action plan / workplan 
 
Part A: Understanding of the Context  
This section provides a brief overview of the history and context within which the AfCFTA strategy was 
developed and will be implemented. The section provides a situational analysis of the AfCFTA and the 
results of survey of the Somali private sector.  
 
AfCFTA situational analysis 
Historical context   
With the Treaty of Abuja in 1991, the Member States of the Organisation for African Unity (OAU) agreed 
on a road map for the creation of a common African market. To accelerate the implementation of the 
Treaty and strengthen regional integration, the African Union (AU) Trade Ministers agreed to establish an 
African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). The AfCFTA has since been a flagship programme of the AU 
and AfCFTA negotiations were launched in June 2015. 
 
On the 21st of March 2018, AU member States took an important step towards the long-term goal of 
creating a single African market. Fifty- four of the fifty-five member States of the African Union signed 
the Agreement establishing the AfCFTA), and the AfCFTA has 47 state parties as of November 2023. The 
agreement is aimed at further deepening the integration of African economies and thereby enhancing 
industrialisation, intra African trade, and the sustainable development of the continent as outlined in the 
African Union’s Agenda 206318.  
 
18 African Union Agenda 2063 - is a strategic framework for the socio-economic transformation of the continent over the next 50 years. Its builds 
on, and seeks to accelerate the implementation of past and existing continental initiatives for growth and sustainable development. 
https://au.int/en/agenda2063
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
30 
 
 
 
The scope of the AfCFTA Agreement covers trade in goods, trade in services, investment, intellectual 
property rights, competition policy, digital trade, and women and youth in trade. This wide scope of the 
AfCFTA moves it beyond the requirements of a traditional free trade area, which generally envisages the 
elimination of tariffs and quotas on trade in goods and other non-tariff measures and is expected to make 
the Agreement a key contributor to the economic integration of Africa.   
 
The significance of the African Continental Free Trade Area 
The AfCFTA will be the largest free trade area in the world in terms of the number of participating 
countries. Some of its expected benefits include19: 
● Increasing trade among African countries which currently ranges between 15-18% of exports.  
● Stimulate production through the development of regional value chains, to ensure that 
manufacturing, agro processing and other activities across the continent are stimulated to supply 
the market. 
● USD 450 billion income boost in Africa by 2035: a 7% gain.20 
● Strengthen the capacities of African companies to access and supply world markets. 
● Strengthen African’s economic and commercial diplomacy.   
 
The AfCFTA is further expected to catalyse Africa’s industrial transformation while boosting trade and 
investment between countries and RECs in line with the AU Agenda 2063 for “The Africa We Want”. 
The AfCFTA is complemented by other continental initiatives, including the:  
● Protocol on Free Movement of Persons, Right to Residence and Right to Establishment, expected 
to promote free movement of people, and  
● The Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM) anticipated to lead to improvement in 
continental air transportation and to contribute to increasing Africa’s global share of the aviation 
industry.   
 
Key features of the AfCFTA  
A key feature of the AfCFTA is that it aims to create a continental free trade area (CFTA). The AfCFTA 
aims to boost intra-African trade by providing a comprehensive and mutually beneficial trade agreement 
among the member States, covering trade in goods and services, investment, intellectual property rights 
and competition policy. In a free trade area, members agree to remove or reduce trade barriers, import 
quotas and tariffs, with the goal of increasing intra-regional trade in goods and services. 
 
The AfCFTA agreement sets a clear roadmap to achieving integration with the RECs playing an important 
part in its implementation. The Preamble to the AfCFTA Agreement says the RECs are building blocks 
“towards the establishment of the African Continental Free Trade Area”. RECs are important for the 
successful implementation of the AfCFTA Agreement not only because of their ability to coordinate 
negotiating positions and provide support to member States for implementation, but also because they 
can mediate disagreements between member States. Nonetheless, it will be important over the next few 
years to clearly define the roles and responsibilities of the RECs and what happens (to the RECs) when the 
AfCFTA achieves a much deeper level of integration.  
 
 
19 https://au.int/en/articles/operational-phase-african-continental-free-trade-area-launched 
20 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2020/07/27/african-continental-free-trade-area
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
31 
 
 
The multiplicity of membership of African countries in regional economic communities has created 
different levels of integration (free trade areas vs customs unions vs monetary unions).  As a result, 
different trade regimes, rules of origin, tariffs or standards etc, - continue to restrict trade. 
Implementation of the AfCFTA should therefore take into consideration existing frameworks (where there 
is already deeper level of integration) and seek to address or encourage harmonisation of these 
agreements if it is to have a meaningful impact on increasing intra-regional trade on the continent. The 
ARII 2019 report found that overall integration on the African continent is low21. The high score of only 
0.625 shows that even the top performer has the potential to boost integration and tap its benefits. The 
disparity in countries’ performance is significant, particularly on the productive and infrastructure 
dimensions. Most countries fare best on the free movement of people and macroeconomic dimensions22. 
 
What it covers – protocols and annexes  
Negotiations on the various protocols to the agreement have been organized in two phases; 
● Phase 1 – covering the framework AfCFTA Agreement itself and the protocols on trade in goods, 
trade services, and the rules and procedures for dispute settlement.  
● Phase 2 – covering intellectual property rights, investment, competition policy, digital trade, and 
women and youth in trade.   
Table 1 below provides a breakdown of the coverage of the AfCFTA and the status of the negotiations.   
Table 1: Coverage of the AfCFTA 
Phase
s  
What is covered – protocols  
What is covered – 
Annexes  
Status 
Phase 
1 
i. Trade in Goods,  
ii. Trade in Services, and  
iii. Dispute 
Settlement 
mechanism.  
  
Goods 
i.Schedule of tariff 
concessions  
ii. Rules of origin  
iii.Customs 
Co-
operation 
and 
Mutual 
Administrative 
Assistance  
iv.Trade Facilitation  
v.Non-Tariff Barriers 
vi.Technical Barriers to 
Trade 
vii.Sanitary 
and 
Phytosanitary 
Measures  
viii.Transit 
ix.Trade remedies:  
Guidelines 
on 
implementation 
Trade Remedies  
Services  
i.Schedule of Specific 
Commitments 
ii. MFN exemptions  
iii.Air 
Transport 
Services 
iv.List 
of 
priority 
sectors  
The AfCFTA Agreement and Phase I Protocols are already in force 
since 30 May 2019 (when the 22nd instrument of ratification was 
deposited23, but the negotiations on tariff reductions, rules of origin 
and the specifics for trade in the priority services sectors have not 
been completed. It was hoped that preferential trade under the 
AfCFTA would commence on 1 July 2020. That date was postponed as 
a consequence of COVID-19 to 1st January 2021. The treaty has now 
been operationalised with countries trading based on the tariff 
schedules and RoO agreed.  
 
 
  
 
21 With countries averaging a score of 0.327 (Scores are calculated on a scale of 0 (not at all integrated) to 1 (entirely integrated). 
22AUC, AfDB, UNECA (2019) Africa Regional Integration Index (ARII)  
23 As required by Art 23 of the AfCFTA treaty
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
32 
 
 
v.Framework 
document 
on 
Regulatory 
Cooperation 
Rules and Procedures 
on the Settlement of 
Disputes 
i.Working Procedures 
of the Panel 
ii. Expert Review 
iii.Code of Conduct for 
Arbitrators 
and 
Panelists 
 
Phase 
2 
Phase II negotiations in the 
following areas: Intellectual 
Property Rights, Investment, 
Competition Policy, Digital 
Trade, and Women and Youth 
in Trade.  
 
As of November 2023, negotiations on Phase II protocols are close to 
completion. The first three of these protocols – on investment, 
intellectual property rights, and competition policy – were adopted 
by the AU Assembly at its meeting in February 2023. The remaining 
two protocols, on digital trade and on women and youth in trade, are 
expected to be tabled before the AU Assembly at its meeting in early 
2024.  
i. 
Source: Compiles from various AUC  
Status of ratification and implementation  
The AfCFTA treaty entered into force on 30 May 2019, 30 days after 22 countries had deposited their 
instruments of ratification24. As of November 2023, 47 of the 54 signatories (80%) have deposited their 
instruments of ratification. Somalia has started its domestic ratification process with its cabinet approving 
the treaty. The next stage is the parliamentary approval of the AfCFTA Agreement which will then be 
followed by the deposit of the instruments of ratification with the AUC. 
 
The operational phase was launched in Niamey at the on the 7th of July 2019, and was characterised by 
the adoption of five key instruments25; 
● The Rules of Origin: A regime governing the conditions under which a product or service can be 
traded duty free across the region 
● The Tariff concessions: Trade in Goods, State Parties committed to reduce tariffs on 90% of goods 
traded among themselves in equal annual instalments until they are eliminated within 5 years for 
non-Least Developed Countries (LCDs) and 10 years for Least Developed Countries. For an 
additional 7% of ‘Sensitive’ goods, tariffs will be eliminated within 10 years for non-LDCs and 13 
years for LDCs. A final 3% of ‘Excluded’ products are to retain their tariffs to allow flexibilities for 
State Parties with sensitivities but will be subject to review every five years.  
● The online mechanism on monitoring, reporting and elimination of non-tariff barriers, NTBs: 
NTBs are a great hindrance to intra African trade whether physical, like poor infrastructure, or 
administrative like the behaviour of customs officials. These are to be monitored with a view to 
ensuring they are eliminated. 
 
24 According to Article 23 of the Agreement, entry into force occurs 30 days after the 22nd instrument of ratification is deposited with the 
Chairperson of the African Union Commission (AUC) – the designated depositary for this purpose. 
25 https://au.int/en/articles/operational-phase-african-continental-free-trade-area-launched
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
33 
 
 
● The Pan-African payment and settlement system: To facilitate payments on time and in full, by 
ensuring that payments are made in local currency and at the end of the year there’ll be net 
settlements in foreign exchange. With the certainty of payments, there will be confidence in the 
system. 
● The African Trade Observatory: A trade information portal to address hindrances to trade in 
Africa due to lack of information about opportunities, trade statistics as well as information about 
exporters and importers in countries. The trade observatory will have all this information and 
other relevant data which will be provided by AU member States 
 
The start of trading was planned for the 1st of July 2020, however, was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Trading commenced as of 1st January 2021.  In October 2022, the AfCFTA State Parties and the AfCFTA 
Secretariat launched the Guided Trade Initiative (GTI) under which eight countries started trading under 
the terms of the AfCFTA. These countries are Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Egypt, Mauritius, 
Cameroon and Tunisia. The number of countries participating in the GTI as well as the number of covered 
products has expanded since.  
Somalia – AfCFTA: Situational Analysis  
Context 
Somalia has been rebuilding state institutions and the economy since the end of the devastating civil 
war. The civil war (1991 – 2012) led to complete state collapse, with huge loss of human, institutional and 
physical capital.  A provisional constitution was adopted in August 2012, reforming Somalia as a federation 
and the establishing the Transitional Federal Government. In September 2012, Somalia moved from a 
transitional government to a globally recognized government – the FGS. The current government was 
elected in May 2022. 
 
Despite Somalia’s strong efforts in rebuilding state capabilities, large and sustained investments in 
human and physical capital are needed to improve resilience and support inclusive growth. Close to 70 
percent of the population lives on less than US$1.90 a day, and challenges are exacerbated by the large 
number of internally displaced persons. Growth is insufficient to reduce poverty and address large social 
needs, including job creation.26 
 
In addition, Somalia is highly vulnerable to climate shocks that aggravate food insecurity. Challenges 
have recently been exacerbated by a prolonged drought that has intensified since 2021, compounded 
by global food supply and price pressures. Food insecurity has drastically worsened since 2022. Nearly 8.3 
million people (an estimated 49% of the population) across Somalia are expected to experience high levels 
of acute food insecurity between April and June 2023, worsening from 4.8 million people in March 2022.27  
 
Addressing security risks is a top priority for the newly elected government, as the security situation in 
Somalia remains fragile. The government has announced a new strategy to combat Al-Shabaab, that still 
dominates in some parts of the countryside.28 
 
 
26 NEC Policy Brief ‘Macroeconomic Polices for Growth & Transformation in Somalia’ (2022); IMF County Report No. 22/375, ‘Somalia’ 
(December, 2022).   
27 IPC ‘Somalia: Acute Food Insecurity Snapshot (October 2022 – June 2023) 
https://www.ipcinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ipcinfo/docs/IPC_Somalia_Acute_Food_Insecurity_Snapshot_Oct2022Jun2023.pdf.  
28 IMF County Report No. 22/375, ‘Somalia’ (December, 2022).
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
34 
 
 
Macroeconomic context 
Since 2017, political and economic reforms have helped to stabilise the economy and provide enabling 
conditions for national growth and economic transformation. Somalia has revived key economic 
institutions and ministries and focused on building institutional capacity for the existing ones, for example, 
the Centra Bank of Somalia. Progress has also been made in terms of the rejuvenation of the private 
sector, urbanisation, the growing use of digital technologies and money transfers, and planned 
investments in key sectors. 29 
 
Somalia’s economy rebounded by 2.9% in 2021, following a contraction in in 2020 due to the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic (see figure 2, table). This growth was largely driven by household consumption 
and private investment, supported by high remittance inflows and credit growth. However, economic 
activity in 2022 was downgraded to 1.9%, aligned to slower global growth, the impact of the drought, and 
slowing remittance inflows (see table 2). Growth for 2023 is forecasted as 3.1% but this is subject to 
considerable uncertainty (see table 2).  
 
In the medium-term, growth is forecasted to reach 4.1% in 2027, supported by structural reforms and 
increased financing (see table 2). However, the ongoing impact of COVID-19 and climate shocks are 
expected to impact Somalia’s growth and hamper poverty reduction efforts. 30 
 
Table 2: Somalia's National Income and Prices, 2017- 2021 (USD Millions) 
 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Household final consumption 
10,343 
10,518 
11,792 
11,809 
12,304 
Government final consumption 
486 
495 
529 
595 
676 
Gross fixed capital formation 
954 
1,168 
1,292 
1,340 
1,770 
Exports of goods and services 
994 
1,119 
1,131 
1,178 
1,532 
of which: livestock 
288 
311 
406 
402 
523 
Minus: Imports of goods and services 
4,624 
5,122 
5,423 
5,818 
6,544 
GDP at purchasers' prices 
8,152 
8,178 
9,320 
9,104 
9,739 
GDP per capita, US Dollars 
599 
585 
648 
616 
641 
Source: Somalia: Technical Assistance Report-National Accounts Statistics Mission; IMF Country Report No. 23/364; May 
 
Key features of Somalia’s current growth model 
Notwithstanding the potential and progress made, Somalia’s economy remains vulnerable and requires 
economic transformation. Somalia’s Ninth National Development Plan 2020 – 2024 (NDP-9) and the 
Growth and Economic Transformation Strategy (GETS) provide an articulation of the country’s current 
growth model.  
o NDP-9 builds on the prior NDP-8 which was a landmark document for Somalia. It captures the 
country’s aspirations for equitable growth, poverty reduction, security, and stability. It is focused 
on delivering transformation across three pillars: Governance, Security & Rule of Law, and 
Economic.  
● The Inclusive and Accountable Politics and Reconciliation pillar (Pillar 1) understands 
Somalia’s efforts towards lasting poverty reduction are contingent on a stable and inclusive 
 
29 NEC Policy Brief ‘Trade and Infrastructure in Somalia’ (2022).  
30IMF County Report No. 22/375, ‘Somalia’ (December,2022).
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
35 
 
 
political system. The goal is to: (i) deepen the federalization process; (ii) stabilize and establish 
local governance; (iii) finalise, ratify, and implement the constitution; (iv) prepare and conduct 
fair and credible elections 2024; (v) implement the national reconciliation framework/ 
process; (vi) develop institutional capacity.  
● The Improved Security and Rule of Law pillar (Pillar 2) understands the contributors of 
conflict, injustice to poverty in Somalia, and the provision of security and strengthened rule 
of law are seen as urgent priorities for the country’s overarching development. The goal is: (i) 
reform and strengthen the security sector; and (ii) strengthen the rule of law through 
improving the corrections systems, reforming the judicial system & judiciary, strengthening 
the capacity of the police forces, improving equitable access to justice, and protecting the 
most vulnerable, embedding human rights, and strengthening anti-corruption.  
● The Economic Development pillar (Pillar 3) seeks to transform the economy and induce 
growth by improving resilience in traditional industries, diversifying the economy, and the 
increased role of the government in improving the functioning of the market. The goal is to: 
(i) develop an enabling business environment; (ii) regulate the market; (iii) invest in de-risking 
traditional markets; (iv) large-scale employment in traditional industries; (v) food security; (vi) 
invest in supporting utilities; (vii) diversification of the economy through investment, skills 
training, and formalizing the informal sector.  
o GETS nascent strategic plan articulates Somalia’s aspiration to achieve middle-income status by 
2050, focused on rebuilding secure, stable, and democratic country to accelerate long-term 
economic growth. The 5th National Economic Policy forum on GETS focused on the following 
priority areas31:  
● Policies for Growth and Economic Transformation  
● Trade and Economic Infrastructure Development  
● Domestic Resource Mobilisation and Institutional Development  
● Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion   
● Agriculture, Food Security and Environmental Sustainability  
● Climate Change Adaption and Building Human Resilience  
● Social Sector (Education and Health) with focus on Women and Youth  
Governance structure and trade ecosystem  
Somalia is governed as a federal parliamentary republic – with the President as the head of state, and 
the Prime Minister as the head of government, appointed by the President with the approval of 
parliament. According to the 2012 Constitution, the state is composed of two levels of government:  
(a) Federal Government Level  
(b) Federal Member States Level, comprised of the Federal Member State government, and the local 
governments. 32 
International agreements are negotiated at the federal government level. Where the Federal Government 
must consult the Federal Member States on negotiations relating to international trade and treaties, 
Federal Member State governments are expected to adopt and implement Federal Government policy.  It 
must be acknowledged that some Federal Member State governments have taken a very active self-
governance posture. This has a significant influence on trade within Somalia. Across the Federal Member 
 
31 National Economic Council (NEC): Outcomes of the 5th National Economic Policy Forum on Growth and Economic Transformation Strategy 
(GETS). https://nec.gov.so/outcomes-of-the-5th-national-economic-policy-forum-on-growth-and-economic-transformation-strategy-gets/.  
32 2012. The Federal Republic of Somalia: Provisional Constitution. http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/research/Somalia-Constitution2012.pdf.
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
36 
 
 
States, there are different import and export taxes, fees, tariffs, and charges.33 This results in a fragmented 
internal trade market, with associated significant transactional costs and disperse trade revenue 
collection. Table 3 below maps the trade ecosystem in Somalia and the roles of and responsibilities of FGS 
entities.  
Table 3: Somalia's trade ecosystem 
FGS Entity  
Role/responsibilities 
Parliament  
Ratify treaties and trade legislation  
Cabinet (council of ministers 
appointed by the Prime Minister) 
Main role is to endorse policies and produce Ministerial decrees from each office. The 
cabinet passes policies as a policy maker which are then sent to the parliament for 
approval. 
Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry (MOCI) 
Formulate trade policies, strategies, and guidelines, including incentives 
National Trade Facilitation 
Committee  
Coordination and consultation body to facilitate the implementation of trade reforms  
Ministry of Finance  
Formulate financial policies and economic planning that includes trade incentives and 
customs revenue targets  
Revenue & Customs Authority  
Implement tax policy on behalf of the Ministry of finance  
Somali Bureau of Standards 
(SOBS)  
Develop, harmonise and regulate trade standards that facilitate the growth of the 
industrial sector  
Port Authorities 
Manage ports in an effective and efficient manner that facilitates trade  
SOMINVEST  
Advocate for the elaboration of investments incentives that would attract FDI and Trade  
Source: Authors compilation from primary data 
Trade performance 
Somalia’s economy is primarily composed of household final consumption expenditure (estimated as 
equivalent to 141% of GDP in 2021) and the imports of goods and services.34 This reflects the country’s 
dependence on remittances that finance household consumption and imports (see table 4).  
 
Somalia’s trading position has not significantly improved in recent years. This is attributed to several 
factors including: international sanctions imposed on it; an underdeveloped industrial base; perceptions 
about its trade and investments climate; poor trade infrastructure etc. As a result, Somalia has a large and 
chronic trade deficit, see figure 1. IMF data estimates Somalia’s negative trade balance at -70.3 (% of GDP) 
for 2022 (see table 4). This is currently forecasted to persist over the period 2023 – 2027 and must be 
addressed (see table 4).  
 
33 Primary data collection (KII).  
34 National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of Somalia (2022).
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
37 
 
 
Figure 1: Exports and Imports of goods and services 2016-2022 
 
Source: National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of Somalia, 2022 
 
Table 4: Somalia’s Balance of Payments, 2019-2027 
  
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Est. 
Proj. 
Balance of payments 
(Percent of GDP)  
Current account balance 
-10.4 
-10.8 
-17.1 
-15.9 
-13.6 
-14.8 
-15.3 
-15.1 
-15 
Trade balance 
-63.5 
-64.1 
-70.9 
-70.3 
-69.3 
-68.7 
-68.7 
-68.6 
-68.5 
Exports of goods and services 
17.3 
14.1 
17.2 
16.7 
16.8 
16.8 
16.9 
17 
17 
Imports of goods and services 
80.8 
78.2 
88 
87.1 
86.1 
85.6 
85.6 
85.5 
85.5 
Remittances 
24.3 
23.5 
27.3 
27.3 
27.8 
28 
28 
28 
28 
Grants 
29.4 
30.3 
27 
27.7 
28.5 
26.3 
25.9 
25.9 
25.9 
Foreign Direct Investment 
6.9 
7.8 
8 
7.8 
7.8 
7.8 
7.8 
8 
8 
External debt 8/ 
81.9 
57.2 
45.3 
41.2 
6.4 
9.1 
10 
10.6 
11.1 
Source: IMF Somalia County Report No. 22/375 (December,2022) 
Trade composition 
Exports 
Export diversification and limited value addition remain a challenge, as live animals and primary 
agricultural products continue to dominate Somalia’s exports (see figure 5,6 & table 3). According to the 
latest International Trade Centre, these products accounted for 60% of good exports, on average, over 
the period 2017-2021 (see Table 5). Of these exports, live animals remain the most significant, making up 
26% of exported products in 2021 (see Figure 2), although this has reduced from a high of 52% in 2017 
(see table 5). Although precious metals have emerged as an important export in the past few decades, 
the export sector remains substantially supply constrained and undiversified. 35 Somalia’s export revenues 
only accounted for 20% of GDP in 2021, consistent with the average of 19% for the period 2012 – 2019. 
 
35 Ibid.
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
38 
 
 
This is indicative of the low level, and low value, of Somalia’s exports and suggests minimal supply side 
expansion (see figure 5).36 
 
 
 
36 The large decline in export value from 2020 – 2021 is likely a result of the prolonged drought.
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
39 
 
 
 
Table 5: Composition & value of exports 2017-2021 (USD thousand) 
Product label 
Exported 
value in 2017 
% 
value 
Exported 
value in 2018 
% 
value 
Exported 
value in 2019 
% 
value 
Exported 
value in 2020 
%  
value 
Exported 
value in 2021 
% 
value 
All products 
426,263 
 
488,735 
 
418,037 
 
295,938 
 
165,839 
 
Live animals 
220042 
52% 
218595 
45% 
90078 
22% 
69422 
23% 
42781 
26% 
Seeds & fruits 
5750 
1% 
20050 
4% 
43417 
10% 
22608 
8% 
31111 
19% 
Lac; gums, resins and other vegetable saps and 
extracts 
27147 
6% 
37188 
8% 
36185 
9% 
26731 
9% 
29838 
18% 
Fish and crustaceans, molluscs and other aquatic 
invertebrates 
30714 
7% 
38521 
8% 
36153 
9% 
26998 
9% 
11123 
7% 
Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of 
paper or of paperboard 
1 
0% 
3 
0% 
1864 
0% 
3878 
1% 
8991 
5% 
Iron and steel 
125 
0% 
289 
0% 
134 
0% 
382 
0% 
8608 
5% 
Ships, boats and floating structures 
4432 
1% 
2922 
1% 
2 
0% 
3318 
1% 
7047 
4% 
Electrical machinery and equipment and parts 
thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, 
television ... 
2293 
1% 
6664 
1% 
6194 
1% 
3006 
1% 
3995 
2% 
Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage 
products; prepared edible fats; animal ... 
727 
0% 
1504 
0% 
3241 
1% 
6329 
2% 
3686 
2% 
Edible fruit and nuts; peel of citrus fruit or melons 
18194 
4% 
8201 
2% 
9705 
2% 
10546 
4% 
3413 
2% 
Raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and 
leather 
5156 
1% 
4931 
1% 
3557 
1% 
2305 
1% 
2953 
2% 
Machinery, mechanical appliances, nuclear 
reactors, boilers; parts thereof 
1251 
0% 
1654 
0% 
489 
0% 
1037 
0% 
2437 
1% 
Copper and articles thereof 
538 
0% 
2157 
0% 
1099 
0% 
375 
0% 
1648 
1% 
Essential oils and resinoids; perfumery, cosmetic or 
toilet preparations 
964 
0% 
2083 
0% 
1801 
0% 
1969 
1% 
1490 
1% 
Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof 
238 
0% 
389 
0% 
855 
0% 
332 
0% 
1074 
1% 
Natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-
precious stones, precious metals, metals clad ... 
100308 
24% 
128065 
26% 
174415 
42% 
111402 
38% 
784 
0% 
All other exported goods 
8376 
2% 
15503 
3% 
8841 
2% 
5294 
2% 
4839 
3% 
Source: International Trade Centre Trade Map database
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
40 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Composition of exports (percent of total exports), 2021 
 
Source: International Trade Centre Trade Map database 
 
Imports 
Somalia’s imports are mainly driven by food, beverages, and other consumer goods. This marks a shift 
from industrial to consumer imports post 1990 – following the conflict which destroyed Somalia’s 
productive capacity and dramatically reduced public and private sector investment in industry.37 In 2021, 
sugars and confectionary (11%), vegetables/roots (11%), cereals (6%), preparation of cereals starch or 
milk (5%), and electrical goods (5%), comprised Somalia’s top five imports (see figure 7). The import of 
manufacturing inputs is very low.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 World Bank. 2021. Trade as an Engine of Grow in Somalia: Constraints and Opportunities. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/36662 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
41 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Composition of imports (percent of total imports), 2021 
 
Source: International Trade Centre Trade Map database 
 
Direction of trade  
The origin and destination countries of Somalia’s imports and exports largely lie outside of Africa, with 
current low levels of intra-African trade. Over the period 2017 – 2021, the main importing markets for 
Somalia’s exports include Saudi Arabia, India, France, Bulgaria, China, Japan, and Turkey.38 For the same 
period, Somalia’s most important suppliers include China, India, Ethiopia, Turkey, and Kenya.39 This 
demonstrates Somali’s trade (imports and exports) generally orients towards Middle Eastern, Asian, and 
regional markets.  
 
Of Somalia’s trade with the continent, its immediate neighbours Kenya and Ethiopia feature among 
both the country’s top export and import markets (see figure 8 & 9). Most recent (2021) data indicates 
that Somalia’s top five African export markets are Senegal (28%), Egypt (23%), Mozambique (17%), Kenya 
(17%), and Ethiopia (8%) (see figure 8).40 Somalia’s most significant sources of African imports are much 
more heavily concentrated, with Ethiopia accounting for 64% of all African imports in 2021 (see figure 9). 
This is followed by imports from Kenya (22%), Egypt (11%), and South Africa (2%). 
 
38 ITC Trade Map Database 
39 Ibid.  
40 Senegal is not likely Somalia’s top export partner, reflecting difficulties in obtaining accurate trade data for Somalia.
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
42 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Somalia’s African export markets composition, 2021 
 
Source: International Trade Map Trade Map database 
 
Source: International Trade Map Trade Map database 
 
Conversely, informal cross-border trade (ICBT) is dominated by Somalia’s direct neighbours in the Horn 
of Africa: Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Kenya, trading livestock, agricultural goods, foodstuffs, and Khat. For 
example, the Dadaab refugee camps form an important – and substantial – informal trading hub at the 
Somalia – Kenya border. Indeed, ICBT is a prominent phenomenon across the continent, where, for certain 
products and countries, the value of ICBT may meet or exceed that of formal trade. 
Figure 9: Somalia African import source markets
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
43 
 
 
 
 
Investment 
Accounting for foreign direct investment (FDI) as a proportion of GDP, Somalia is performing well, 
reaching an estimated high of 8% in 2021 (see table 4). This is likely indicative of the FGS’ positive attitude 
towards the attraction and protection of FDI, at both the federal and regional level.  
 
The Middle East is Somalia’s largest source of capex, over the period 2010 – 2022 (see figure 11). This is 
not surprising given Somalia’s close economic and cultural ties to the region. Africa is Somalia’s next most 
significant source of FDI, providing USD 351.5m in capex since 2010 (see figure 10). Of African sourced 
FDI, the majority is flowing to the communications and financial services sectors, with Djibouti, Mauritius, 
Kenya, Egypt and Ethiopia as Somalia’s most important African investor countries (see table 6). 41 
 
 
Figure 10: Somalia's source of investment by region (2010 - 2022) 
 
Source: Financial Times Ltd, fDi Markets 
 
Table 6: Somalia's sources of African investment (2010-2022) 
African source Country 
Capex (USD m)  
Number of Projects  
Jobs Created 
Key Sectors 
Djibouti  
209 
2 
138  
Communications 
Mauritius 
105  
1 
69  
Communications 
Kenya 
19  
2 
44 
Financial services 
Egypt  
10  
1 
22 
Financial services 
Ethiopia 
10 
1 
22 
Financial services 
Source: Financial Times Ltd, fDi Markets 
 
41 Figures estimates from Financial Times fDI Markets project data not FDI as registered by Central Bank of Somalia.  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Middle East
Africa
Western Europe
North America
Asia-Pacific
Capex (USD m)
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
44 
 
 
 
 
Policy Actions 
Table 5 below outlines the emerging key issues and proposed policy actions.  
 
Table 7: Somalia trade & macroeconomic situational analysis 
Issue identified   
Proposed 
policy 
action  
Outputs  
Outcomes 
Ownership/lead entity 
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
Chronic 
and 
unsustainable trade 
deficit. 
This 
is 
currently 
financed 
by remittance flows 
which 
are 
susceptible 
and 
vulnerable to global 
shocks, for example 
COVID-19 
pandemic.  
Implementing 
the 
AfCFTA 
will 
offer 
Somalia opportunities 
to expand its access to 
the African market 
and in turn generate 
export revenue and 
taxes to increase its 
domestic 
revenue 
collection.  
Increased 
export 
revenue  
Reduced 
trade 
deficit  
MoCI working with NTFC 
to coordinate all players 
involved 
in 
implementation of the 
strategy. 
Mixed 
- 
FGS 
budget and a 
range of donors. 
Poor 
domestic 
resource 
mobilisation.  
Trade related reforms, 
including 
the 
implementation 
customs systems and 
trade 
facilitation 
reforms, 
should 
increase 
domestic 
revenue collection.  
Reduced 
transactional 
costs  
Reduced 
cost 
of 
trade 
MoCI 
working 
with 
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue and Customs 
departments.  
External - Trade 
Mark 
Africa, 
World Customs 
Organisation 
(WCO), 
UNCTAD, 
ITC, 
and 
bi-lateral 
donors working 
on trade. 
Limited 
exports, 
with poor export 
diversification. 
Somalia’s 
exports 
are 
mainly 
comprised of live 
animals 
and 
raw 
agricultural goods.   
Opening 
of 
the 
regional 
export 
market 
through 
implementation of the 
AfCFTA, 
targeting 
specific African export 
markets 
for 
value 
added 
exports 
in 
livestock and agro-
processing.  
Increased 
exports 
to 
African 
countries  
Expanded 
access to 
markets  
MoCI 
working 
with 
Ministries 
associated 
with 
export 
diversification (Ministry 
of 
Agriculture 
& 
Irrigation, Ministry of 
Petroleum & Mineral 
Resources, Ministry of 
Ports 
& 
Marine 
Transport, Ministry of 
Fisheries 
& 
Marine 
Resources). 
Mixed 
- 
FGS 
budget, Afrexim 
Bank, 
UNDP, 
ITC.
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
45 
 
 
Somalia – AfCFTA: Private Sector Perceptions of the AfCFTA 
Objectives and scope of the survey  
 
The private sector is expected to play a leading role in the implementation of the AfCFTA. There can be 
no AfCFTA without the full participation of African economic operators - namely, private-sector players, 
who must make use of the agreement. Consequently, in the development of this strategy, a survey of the 
Somali private sector was undertaken. The scope of the survey covered the following;  
● Awareness of the AfCFTA – whether the private sector knows the AfCFTA and how it can be 
leveraged to grow their businesses/investments. 
Benefits, costs, challenges, and risks of the AfCFTA – whether the AfCFTA presents opportunities 
and risks for some businesses in the region. 
● Stakeholder engagement – whether the private sector has been consulted on the current and 
future negotiations and the need of having a structured mechanism for engagement.  
● Required support- Support that is necessary for the private sector to realise the benefits of the 
AfCFTA. 
● Role of the private sector – The role that the private sector envisages to play in ensuring the 
materialization of the foreseen benefits. 
 
The findings of the survey were expected to inform this strategy and help improve FGS policy makers 
awareness of this important feedback that would influence the effective operationalization of the AfCFTA 
in Somalia. 
Coverage of the survey  
Following consultations with FGS, the survey was restricted to respondents from Somalia and the Somali 
diaspora in Kenya, South Sudan, and Uganda.  
● The survey aimed to gather perceptions on the level of awareness, opportunities, constraints, and 
critical reforms needed to maximise the benefits of the AfCFTA.  
● The survey was undertaken from July 2022 to August 2022.  
● The Online survey received 174 responses across Somalia, Kenya, South Sudan, and Uganda.  
Survey characteristics  
The survey targeted 300 respondents from Somalia and the 3 designated diaspora communities; the 174 
responses represent 34% of the targeted sample. This is a good outcome given that online surveys tend 
to have very low response rates (less than 10%). Figure 12 below provides an illustration of the survey 
sample. The following findings are worth highlighting; 
● Only 29 Somalia-based businesses responded to the survey even though the survey questionnaire 
had been translated into Somali. The highest number of respondents were Somali businesses in 
Kenya and South Sudan  
● A significant number (78%) of the firms surveyed operated across the region with 18% operating 
in Somalia only. Similarly, 41% and 34% of businesses have been in operation for less than 5 and 
10 years respectively.  
● Somalia-based businesses are mainly focused on the domestic market while those in the diaspora 
as expected are more regionally focused. Twenty eight percent of the firms were in the wholesale 
and trade sectors followed by energy (16%), trade and logistics 14% and healthcare 11%.
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
46 
 
 
● Most firms surveyed were medium to large42 in turns of annual turnover, 83% of the firms 
surveyed in Somalia falling the medium to large category compared to 60% in the diaspora.  
● The number of female owned businesses that responded is quite low at 13%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 Based on the FGS classification of firm’s size Micro ($5-10K) small ($10-50K) medium ($50-100K) Large (100k plus).
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
47 
 
 
Figure 6 Survey Sample Characteristics 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
48 
 
 
Key results from the survey 
The full survey report and its detailed findings are available as an annex to this report. In summary, the 
following are relevant to the elaboration of this strategy and action plan.  
 
Balance of trade  
Imports account for an overwhelming proportion of trade activity - of the firms surveyed, 89% indicated 
that they engage in imports, 9% exports and 3% re-exports – figure 13. There is no difference between 
Somali based and diaspora firms regarding the type of trade activity they engage in. The findings are 
consistent with the fact that imports are equivalent to 80% of Somalia’s GDP.  
 
Figure 7: Type of trade activity (including by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Exporters perspective  
EAC is the main export market - of the firms that had exported before, 53% indicated that they had 
exported to the EAC – see figure 14. This correlates with the fact that that the majority (78%) of the firms 
surveyed operate regionally in East Africa. The findings also indicate that the Middle East (15%) is an 
important export partner which can be attributed to Somalia’s longstanding trade links and strong cultural 
ties to the region. Both Somali based and foreign-based firms, do not have significant export trade with 
other African regions outside the EAC. The low level of trade to these destinations is an opportunity for 
Somalia to address under the AfCFTA.
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
49 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Somali businesses key export destinations (including by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Difficulty in exporting to RoA – respondents were asked to rate their exporting experience when 
accessing African export markets. At the macro level (disaggregation between Somalia based vs diaspora) 
there is no significant difference with 38% of firms having and easy experience compared to 35% who 
indicated that their exporting experience was difficult – figure 15. When the responses are disaggregated 
based on location of the respondent, it is clear that Somalia based firms faced significant difficulties in 
accessing the RoA market while those Somali owned firms based in the diaspora find it easier to trade 
with the rest of the continent – see figure 15. We also analysed whether the exporting experience differed 
based on firm size and no of years in operation.  
 
Figure 9: Experience in exporting to RoA 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Export barriers identified – firms were asked to indicate what were the key barriers that affected their 
ability to access the African market. Across both groups, the most significant export restrictions/barriers 
are (i) unnecessary customs controls (20%); (ii) multiple testing agencies (14%); (iii) excessive data and 
documents collection (14%); (iv) compliance with standards (12%); and (v) unnecessary roadblocks and 
random checks (10%) – see figure 16. Exporters based in Somalia highlighted both unnecessary customs 
controls and multiple testing agencies as top two barriers but in addition highlighted compliance with
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
50 
 
 
standards and visa /work permit requirements as key barriers that affect them. For Somali exporters in 
the EAC, their barriers in accessing the Somali market are like those highlighted above – see figure 17.  
Figure 10: Restrictions / barriers encountered while exporting 
Figure 11: Trade restriction / barriers affecting diaspora exports to Somalia 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
Figure 12:Export barriers by location 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
51 
 
 
 
Importer’s perspective  
Direction of import trade – EAC, Rest of the World, and the Middle East are the main source of imports. 
– see figure 18 The other regional communities in African represent a very small component of Somalia’s 
imports. This highlights the need to develop these markets under the AfCFTA to further diversify Somalia 
imports sourcing. The RoW is the primary source of imports for Somali based traders followed by the EAC 
and Middle East. For Somali traders based in the EAC, their primary source of imports is the EAC countries 
(– see figure 18), and this is mainly due to the customs union where imports cross the border tariff free.  
Figure 13: Somali businesses key import sources (including by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Difficulty in importing from RoA – 48% of all Somali firms involved in importing indicate that it’s easy 
to import – figure 19. When the data is further disaggregated by location, it’s clear that it is roughly twice 
as difficult for Somali-based firms to import than it is for firms in the diaspora – see figure 19. Firms located 
in the EAC have benefited from the extensive trade facilitation reforms that have been implemented over 
the last 20 years. These reforms have led to significant reductions in trading times and costs.  
 
Figure 14: Experience in importing (including by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Import barriers identified  
Respondents were asked to highlight the barriers they face when importing. Across both groups, the main 
import barriers are like those reported in export trade. These include, (i) unnecessary customs controls
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
52 
 
 
(18%); (ii) compliance with standards (14%); (iii) excessive data and documents collection (13%); (iv) 
multiple testing agencies (11%); (v) and unnecessary roadblocks and random checks (10%) – see figure 20. 
When the data is disaggregated for location, firms based in Somalia highlight (i) unnecessary customs 
controls (17%); (ii) Multiple testing agencies (15%); (iii) work permit and visa requirements (11%); and (iv) 
unnecessary roadblocks and random checks (9%) – see figure 21. 
 
Figure 15: Import barriers identified 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
53 
 
 
Figure 16: import barriers identified by location 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Trading firms’ awareness of the AfCFTA 
Seventy three percent of firms in Somalia and those in the diaspora indicated unanimously that they had 
a low awareness of the AfCFTA. When the data is broken down by location, it is surprising that the lack of 
awareness is higher in the diaspora (77%) than it is with firms based in Somalia (52%) – figure 22.  
Figure 17: Awareness of the AfCFTA (incl by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Perceptions of opportunities and challenges of the AfCFTA 
Opportunities – the private sector recognizes the bigger market size (18%) as a key potential benefit 
from the AfCFTA, followed by increased economies of scale (16%), access to raw/intermediate goods 
(15%), low business costs (14%) and enhanced industrial development (14%) - figure 23. These potential 
gains from the AfCFTA are largely driven by the increased and improved access that Somali traders will 
have once the AfCFTA has been ratified in implemented in Somalia. However, when separating Somali
=== PAGE 56 ===
 
54 
 
 
firms from diaspora firms, better visa openness and air-connectivity was the second most important 
perceived opportunity at 19% - figure 24. Firms in the diaspora highlight enhanced industrial development 
as the third most important opportunity under the AfCFTA.  
 
Figure 18: Perceptions of the opportunities under the AfCFTA  
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
55 
 
 
Figure 19: Perceptions of the opportunities under the AfCFTA by location 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
 
Challenges – as with most trade agreements, there will be winners and losers from the AfCFTA as well. 
From the survey, firms highlighted (i) increased competition (14%); influx of imports and counterfeits 
(11%); (iii) increased taxes due to tariff revenue losses (11%) and infrastructure connectivity challenges 
(roads, air and Sea) – (combined 32%) as the leading challenges they anticipate will emerge from the 
implementation of the AfCFTA – figure 25. When the data is disaggregated by location, some interesting 
perceptions emerge- figure 26.  
● Firms located in Somalia highlight; (i) limited shipping lines to access African ports (14%); (ii) 
increased competition (14%), influx of imports and counterfeits (13%) as the three most 
important challenges of implementing the AfCFTA 
● Conversely, Somali owned firms located in the diaspora cited; (i) increased competition (14%); (ii) 
Inadequate air connectivity between Somalia and other Africa markets (11%); and (iii) increased 
taxes due to tariff revenue losses (11%) as the key challenges that would emerge from the 
implementation of the AfCFTA.
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
56 
 
 
 
Figure 20: Perceptions of the challenges under the AfCFTA (incl by location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
 
Figure 21: Perceptions of the challenges under the AfCFTA by location
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
57 
 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Sources of Information of the AfCFTA 
When asked what the main sources of information were, firms involved in international trade indicated 
their top three main sources were; (i) freight forwarding and customs clearance agents (22%); (ii) other 
traders (19%); (iii) brokers and facilitators (17%) – figure 27. When the data is disaggregated for location 
trading firms based in Somalia relied on (i) the Ministry of Trade and Industry (23%) other traders (14% 
and (iii) the Somalia trade information portal (13%). This finding suggests that the interventions promoted 
by the FGS through the MOCI have been effective in creating awareness of the AfCFTA. Traders in the 
diaspora highlight their main sources as freight forwarding and customs clearance agents, other traders, 
brokers and facilitators. 
 
Figure 22: Sources of information of the AfCFTA 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
58 
 
 
 
Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA  
Firms were also asked to indicate the type of support they would need to leverage and maximize the 
benefits of the AfCFTA. Firms both in Somalia and the diaspora cited the following four intervention as 
critical to their beneficiation from the AfCFTA; (i) increased awareness of the AfCFTA protocols and their 
relevance (15%); (ii) improving business and investment climate (14%); (iii) Trade linkages via trade fairs 
and symposiums (13%); (iv)Private sector representation at AfCFTA negotiations (13%); (v) and addressing 
infrastructure bottlenecks (13%) – figure 28. When the data is disaggregated by location, firms based in 
Somalia cite visa openness as the most important support requested to benefit from the AfCFTA. In 
contrasts diaspora firms prioritise addressing infrastructure bottlenecks – see figure 29.  
Figure 23: Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA (incl location) 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
59 
 
 
 
Figure 24: Support required to benefit from the AfCFTA by location 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
How should FGS engage with the private sector?  
Engaging the private sector in the negotiation and implementation of the AfCFTA is critical to building 
ownership and generating greater awareness for the costs and benefits of the agreement. Firms were 
asked to indicate the best way in which they should be engaged. Most firms opted for (i) representation 
through the ministry of trade (31%) and (ii) representation through their industry / sector representative 
bodies (30%). When the results are disaggregated by location, Somali based firms prefer active 
engagement in negotiations and representation by their industry of sector bodies.  Forms in the diaspora 
prefer representation through national ministries of trade and private sector representative bodies – 
figure 30.
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
60 
 
 
 
 
Figure 25: Private sector preferences for AfCFTA engagement 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Policy Actions:   
Table 6 below outlines the emerging issues and proposed policy actions  
Table 8: Private sector knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA 
Issue identified   
Proposed 
policy 
action  
Outputs  
Outcomes  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed source 
of funding 
EAC is a key 
African 
market 
for both Somali 
exports 
and 
imports.  
Fast tracking the 
accession 
negotiations 
to 
the EAC would 
enhance 
Somalia’s market 
access 
in 
this 
important region:  
Roadmap for EAC 
accession. 
Harmonisation of 
trade 
regimes 
with the EAC 
MoCI 
working 
with 
Prime 
Minister’s Office 
(Economic 
Development 
Pillar) 
& 
parliamentary 
committee 
Internal 
– 
FGS 
budget 
Trade facilitation 
remains a key 
barrier both for 
exporters 
and 
importers. 
Barriers include 
(i) 
unnecessary 
customs 
controls; 
(ii) 
multiple testing 
agencies; 
(iii) 
excessive 
data 
FGS working with 
the private sector 
to conduct three 
audits on NTBs 
that traders face 
when importing or 
exporting 
via 
Road, Air and Sea, 
coordinated 
by 
NTFC. 
(i) prioritised NTB 
removal 
action 
plan 
(ii) 
NTB 
reporting 
platform. 
Reduced cost of 
trade  
MoCI 
working 
with 
NTFC 
& 
federal 
member 
states  
External – Trade 
Mark Africa 
MOCI 
and 
relevant bodies to 
Simplification 
of 
trade procedures 
Digitised 
trade 
process 
that
=== PAGE 63 ===
 
61 
 
 
and documents 
collection; 
(iv) 
compliance with 
standard; and (v) 
unnecessary 
roadblocks and 
random checks.  
undertake 
a 
review of existing 
trade compliance 
procedures 
and 
requirements 
& 
mapping of entire 
importing 
and 
exporting journey 
with the view to 
simplifying 
and 
digitising them.  
and 
documentation  
reduce time and 
cost  
Low 
level 
of 
awareness of the 
AfCFTA and its 
associated costs 
and benefits  
MOCI to develop a 
civil 
society 
education 
and 
communications 
strategy 
that 
would 
increase 
the 
knowledge 
and awareness of 
the AfCFTA & EAC.  
AfCFTA 
communication 
strategy  
Increased 
awareness of the 
AfCFTA 
at 
all 
levels 
– 
government, 
private 
sector, 
and society as a 
whole  
MoCI 
working 
with NTFC 
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, 
and 
UNECA 
MOCI 
to 
work 
closely with other 
government 
ministries 
and 
agencies to build 
knowledge 
and 
awareness of the 
AfCFTA within the 
FGS. 
MOCI 
to 
work 
with 
private 
sector 
representative 
organisations 
to 
continue to build 
awareness 
and 
knowledge of the 
costs and benefits 
of the AfCFTA. 
Visa access and 
air connectivity 
are critical for 
Somali 
companies 
looking to access 
the 
African 
market  
Develop roadmap 
for FMP & SAATM 
ratification 
to 
speed 
up 
ratification.   
FMP and SAATM 
ratification 
roadmaps  
Increased number 
of 
arrivals 
and 
improved 
connectivity with 
the continent  
FMP: Ministry of 
Foreign 
Affairs 
working 
with 
MoCI 
 
SAATM: 
Somalia 
Civil 
Aviation 
Authority (SCAA) 
working 
with 
MoCI 
FMP: Internal – 
FGS budget  
 
SAATM: External - 
IATA and African 
Civil 
Aviation 
Commission 
(AFCAC) 
Enhanced access 
to shipping lines 
is 
vital 
for 
Somalis 
to 
exploit 
market 
opportunities 
along the East 
African 
Coast 
FGS to FastTrack 
implementation 
of National Blue 
Economy 
Strategy.  
NBES 
implementation 
plan  
Increased flow of 
exports 
and 
income from blue 
economy 
activities  
Ministry 
of 
Fisheries 
and 
Marine Resources 
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, 
AfDB, 
UNECA
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
62 
 
 
and the Indian 
ocean states.  
Targeted 
and 
consistent 
engagement 
with the private 
sector.  
Enhance 
participation 
of 
private sector in 
NTFC 
through 
platforms where 
specific 
reforms 
can be discussed 
and implemented 
with 
private 
sector input on 
trade 
and 
industrial policy.  
AfCFTA 
Private 
sector 
engagement 
strategy  
Increased 
levale 
of awareness of 
the AfCFTA among 
the private sector  
MoCI 
working 
with 
Somalia 
Chamber 
of 
Commerce 
and 
Civil Society 
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, 
Trade 
Mark Africa 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd
=== PAGE 65 ===
 
63 
 
 
Part B: Somalia National AfCFTA Strategic 
Intervention Framework:  
Vision of the strategy  
The vision outlined for this strategy is aligned with the Somalia National Development Plan 2020 to 2024 
(NDP-9)43 which charts the nation's path towards economic growth and poverty reduction. Specifically, 
the inclusive growth pillar that outlines a specific objective of “Sustaining economic growth and provide 
greater employment opportunities by transforming traditional industries, such as livestock and crop 
production, and adapting them to climate change, while inducing growth in the private sector”. The 
AfCFTA has been touted as the best opportunity for Africa to realise its vision of creating a single market 
which in turn drives economic growth and development on the continent for all its people. As such, both 
the EDP 9 and the goals of the AfCFTA are aligned and provide the basis and inspiration for the vision 
outlined for this national implementation strategy. The proposed mission statement is; 
A resilient economy supported by the effective implementation of the AfCFTA that facilitates sustainable 
livelihoods for all 
Mission of the strategy  
To deliver on the vision outlined above, the FGS would need to leverage its organs and institutions 
facilitate and broker effective implementation of the AfCFTA at National level while aligning reforms and 
interventions with regional and continental trade frameworks. Consequently, the proposed mission 
statement is; 
 
Facilitating vibrant, value added and diversified trade between Somalia and the rest of Africa which in 
turn delivers a resilient national economy while contributing to poverty reduction for all segments of 
Somali society.  
 
Objectives of the strategy  
The objectives of the strategy are; 
1. To provide a framework that will guide the implementation of the AfCFTA in Somalia  
2. To provide the FGS with the evidence base needed as it participates in the negotiations of the 
remaining protocols of the AfCFTA agreement 
3. To help MOCI and other FGS ministries and agencies understand their roles in the alignment and 
implementation of the AfCFTA  
 
Theory of change (ToC)  
The dynamics of implementing the Somalia National AfCFTA Strategy and the proposed policy and strategy 
recommendations require an understanding of the challenges that currently limit the growth of Somalia’s 
trade with the rest of Africa. Equally, there are several opportunities that Somalia could exploit that would 
increase its capacity, value and volume of trade with the ROA. The challenges and opportunities identified 
have emerged from the extensive feedback received from the (i) key informant interviews, (ii) the Somalia 
private sector perception survey of (domestic and diaspora), and (iii) the review of literature which 
 
43 MPIED (2020) Somalia National Development Plan 2020 to 2024 (NDP-9) - The Path to a Just, Stable and Prosperous Somalia
=== PAGE 66 ===
 
64 
 
 
included the national policies, strategies, and literature from other multilateral institutions44. The ToC 
presented in figure 31 below attempts to explain how these challenges and opportunities can be 
addressed / exploited to deliver the type of impact that the AfCFTA has been envisioned to deliver for 
countries in the continent. Part C of this strategy provides a diagnostic of some of these challenges and 
opportunities by assessing how the current Somalia national trade regime and regulatory framework is 
positioned to facilitate the effective implementation of the AfCFTA and in doing so maximise the benefits 
for the country and its people. The elements of the ToC are discussed below.  
Key Opportunities 
The AfCFTA presents a range of opportunities for Somalia. These include the following:  
 
● Political drive to implement – one of the key reasons for the slow pace of African integration has 
been the lack of political drive to implement agreements and initiatives. The newly elected 
Federal government has indicated the importance international continental and regional trade 
integration. The AfCFTA agreements has been approved by cabinet and is now being tables at the 
newly elected parliament. The new President has indicated the importance of regional integration 
initiatives by appointing an envoy to the EAC to oversee and FastTrack Somalia application to join 
the EAC by July 2022. At continental level, there is strong political awareness and drive to 
implement as demonstrated by (i) the speed and number of ratifications; and (ii) number of 
countries developing AfCFTA implementation strategies. Somalia is well placed to benefit from 
this drive to reform and harmonize African trade. 
● Ease of harmonization – The East African region is one of the most integrated regional economic 
communities. The EAC has the lead the way in the implementation of far-reaching regional trade 
reforms that have driven significant intra-community trade. With Somalia seeking to join the EAC, 
it would be able to adopt and benefit from tried and tested trade policy and legislation that would 
ease harmonization of both regional and continental trade frameworks. For example, the region 
has established frameworks for trade facilitation and coordination that have helped reduce the 
cost of trading in the EAC.  
● Access to technical expertise – Somalia has large young and educated diaspora keen to return 
and contribute to its development and fill the capacity and skills gaps. Somalia can also call on an 
East African pool of technical experts with regional experience in supporting the implementation 
of trade related reforms / strategies.   
● Leverage trade infrastructure and corridors – There are significant infrastructure upgrades and 
trade corridors that have been established in the region which Somalia can leverage to enhance 
its access to the continent. For example, the Mombasa-Kigali Corridor comprises the Mombasa 
Port, the Mombasa-Nairobi railway network, and over 1,700 km of roads that link both cities. 
Mombasa is Africa’s fifth-busiest port the main trade gateway for the Eastern Africa region 
connecting Somalia with EAC members states - Kenya, Uganda, South Sudan, Rwanda, Burundi 
and DRC. The transformation of the Berbera corridor into an economic hub is being hailed as a 
game changer for the country's livestock-based, remittance-dependent economy. Integration of 
Somalia into these trade corridors will provide access to markets, connecting adjoining countries, 
transit countries and providing access to seaports for landlocked countries. 
 
44 World bank, IMF, UNIDO etc
=== PAGE 67 ===
 
65 
 
 
Figure 26 Proposed Theory of Change
=== PAGE 68 ===
 
66 
 
 
● Interest in financing the AfCFTA – The AfCFTA carries such significance and importance to African 
countries and to the rest of the world. The long-term benefits of the AfCFTA to the continent have 
helped attract finance from its Pan-African institutions such as the AfDB, Afri-Exim bank, PTA 
Bank, Africa Finance corporation etc to support the implementation of various components of the 
agreement. Additionally, there is a host of multilateral organisations that have expressed an 
interest and are providing funding for the AfCFTA at continental, regional and national levels. 
Most of the finance is targeted at addressing the more than funding gap of up to $100 billion for 
infrastructure that would open the continent to increased and sustain internal trade. Somalis has 
already tapped some of this funding for its trade related infrastructure.  
● Women and youth stand to gain – in Somalia, the region and continent women dominate cross 
border trade. According to the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), women account for around 
70% of informal cross- border traders in Africa45. Tariff reductions under the AfCFTA will enable 
informal women traders to operate through formal channels, bringing better protection. The 
removal of non-tariff barriers (NTBs) will address the numerous barriers that have continued toa 
affect and limit trading opportunities for women. The AUC has now added women and youth in 
trade protocol to the phase two AfCFTA negotiations to ensure that these important demographic 
groups actively participate and benefit from the AfCFTA. Somalis is well placed to participate in 
the development and negotiation of this important protocol.  
● Drive job creation - the AfCFTA will be the opportunity to close the gender income gap, and the 
opportunity for SMEs to access new markets. This is significant, since small and medium-sized 
enterprises account for 90% of jobs in Africa. In Somalia, increased intra African trade is expected 
to create new opportunities and jobs in sectors like agro-processing, light manufacturing, fishing, 
meat processing, transport and logistics including shipping etc. These jobs are critical in helping 
the Somalia meet its growing demand for jobs as well as facilitating social cohesion and peace.  
● Contribute to reducing poverty – assessment of the impact of the AfCFTA on poverty on the 
continent indicate that its implementation would boost regional income by 7% or $450 billion, 
speed up wage growth for women, and lift 30 million people out of extreme poverty by 203546. 
Wages for both skilled and unskilled workers will also be boosted by 10.3% for unskilled workers, 
and 9.8% for skilled workers47. 
Key Challenges  
There are number of challenges outlined in the ToC. These are summarised in this section but are 
addressed in detail in Part B of the strategy; 
● Security and governance – The security situation within Somalia over the last five years continues 
to affect perceptions on whether the country is open for trade or a safe destination for FDI. The 
country is still under UN sanctions and other sanctions regimes imposed by the US, UK and EU 
which continue to restrict the ability to trade and effect financial transactions. In addition, border 
disputes with neighbouring countries continue to affect the flow of trade and limit the growth of 
some sectors of the economy. For example, the maritime border dispute48 with Kenya limits the 
potential of the fisheries sector and Somalia’s efforts to exploits its oil and gas resources within 
its exclusive economic zone. While Somalia has improved its DB ranking with significant reforms, 
the country in 2020 was still ranked 190th which suggest that the business environment is still 
difficult and may affect investors’ confidence.  
 
45 https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/36085-doc-qa_cfta_en_rev15march.pdf 
46 WBG (202) The AfCFTA – economic and distributional effects  
47 ibid 
48 After seven years of growing resentment over the issue, the ICJ ruled that there was no de facto maritime boundary, effectively rejecting 
most of Kenya’s claims - https://issafrica.org/iss-today/icj-draws-the-line-in-kenya-and-somalias-troubled-waters
=== PAGE 69 ===
 
67 
 
 
● Slow pace of accession or ratification of trade agreements – Somalia signed the AfCFTA 
agreements on the 21st March 2018 and the treaty was then approved by cabinet on the 14th 
august 2020. The treaty is now awaiting parliamentary approval before the instrument of 
ratification is then deposited with the AUC49. As on November 2022, Somalia is listed as “awaiting 
confirmation of the approval of the ratification” on the Tralac AfCFTA ratification barometer50.  
● Low level of Somalia trade with RoA – The majority of Somalis trade is with countries in the gulf 
where it exports livestock and other agricultural produce. In 2018, the United Arab Emirates, 
Oman, Saudi Arabia, China, and Japan together accounted for 81 percent of total Somalia’s 
exports51. The bulk of its imports are also sourced from Asia and the middle east. Over time, 
Kenya, India, and, more recently, China displaced Europe and the United States as Somalia’s most 
important import suppliers52. Trade with other African countries (Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti) is 
mainly informal and hence limited records on its value and composition. In the survey conducted 
for this strategy, 57% businesses located in Somalia found it difficult to export to other Africa 
countries while 50% found it difficult to import from other African countries53. Availability of trade 
statistics remains a key challenge and will continue to affect good policy making.  
● Fractured internal market – Discussions with private sectors representative bodies indicate that 
numerous NTBs affect the movement of goods from one federal state to another thus restricting 
trade and increasing the costs of trading. Low levels of market integration and limited FGS control 
over tax administration in some of the federal states has created parallel tax regimes which 
fracture the internal market. From the survey conducted for this strategy, Somalia firms listed the 
following as the top five barriers they encounter whole exporting – unnecessary customs controls 
(20%); multiple testing agencies (14%); excessive documentation (14%); compliance with 
standards (12%); and unnecessary roadblock and random checks (10%)54.  
● Low level of industrialisation and value addition – most Somalia’s exports have limited value 
addition. The top export (livestock) constitutes 25% of exports over the last five years. These 
exports are of live animals with minimal value addition. Livestock exports have been vulnerable 
to import bans that trade partners impose during outbreaks of animal diseases, notably the ban 
by Saudi Arabia in 2000–0955. Somalia’s export crops also face the additional challenge of high 
post-harvest losses due to limited processing and storage capacity.   
● Low level of awareness of the AfCFTA – the survey conducted for this strategy revealed that there 
is a very low level of awareness of the AfCFTA in the Somalia business community in in Somalia 
compared to its diaspora. The results of the survey indicate that 73% of Somali businesses located 
in Somalia had a low level of awareness of the AfCFTA compared to a high level of awareness 
(77%) for Somalia business in the diaspora (Kenya, Uganda, and South Sudan)56.  
● Poor trade infrastructure – The conflict and insecurity in Somalia has negatively impacted its 
trade infrastructure and its ability to effectively connect to the African market. Key road, port and 
air transport infrastructure needs to be upgraded to support the flow of trade between Somalia 
and the RoA. The links between the well-established trade corridors in the region can and should 
be prioritized to open opportunities for trade expansion and diversification.  In the survey, Somali 
 
49 Ratification was delayed by the recently concluded presidential elections  
50 https://www.tralac.org/resources/infographic/13795-status-of-afcfta-ratification.html 
51 WBG (2021) Trade as an Engine of Grow in Somalia: Constraints and Opportunities 
52 Ibid  
53 FGS (2022) AfCFTA perceptions Survey of the Somalia business community 
54 ibid 
55 Ibid  
56 Ibid
=== PAGE 70 ===
 
68 
 
 
firms were asked to indicate what were the key challenges in effective implementation of the 
AfCFTA. Fourteen percent of the firms surveyed indicated that a key challenge would be limited 
shipping lines from Somalia to other African ports; 11% cited inadequate connectivity between 
Somalia and other African markets; 11% highlighted inadequate border infrastructure; and 9% 
mentioned the inadequate air connectivity between Somali and other African countries57. In total, 
45% of the firms surveyed highlighted infrastructure related challenges that would limit their 
access to the African market under the AfCFTA.  
● Lack of requisite trade laws, policies, and regulations – while Somalia has in recent years made 
significant progress in updating its trade laws and regulations more still needs to be done to align 
them to the regional trade agreements it has entered or plan to ratify. To support efforts to 
improve industrial capacity, the currents standards regime and regulations need to be updated. 
The FGS has set up the standards agency which is a positive step however it needs both capacity 
and support in updating the regulatory regime.  
● Limited availability of trade data – this is major constraint to effective trade policy on the AfCFTA. 
The FGS has set up the national statistics agency and made efforts to improve data collection and 
reporting. Nevertheless, there is limited data on the composition of Somalia’s trade, the scale, 
value and volume of its informal trade and more specifically, limited data on the potential trading 
opportunities in African markets that Somalia could harness of exploit.  
● Inclusive participation in trade – Formal trading in Somalia like in many African countries is 
dominated by men with women, youth, and PWDs relegated to low level production or to the 
informal trade – areas with limited income generation potential. Although trade can serve as a 
catalyst to promote greater gender equality, it is not gender neutral. Women and men are 
impacted differently due to differences in economic representation and various social 
inequalities. For example, the Somalia societal construct means that that women and youth 
traders are less likely to be equipped with the appropriate skills, technology and resources that 
would enable them to benefit from trade liberalization. These groups continue to suffer from 
invisibility, stigmatization, violence, harassment, poor working conditions, and a lack of 
recognition for their economic contribution58. The benefits under the Agreement for women and 
youth are not automatic, and there must be a better understanding of what is required at the 
national and regional levels to enhance women and youth participation and beneficiation59. 
Intervention pillars  
● Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties – aims to address fast-track the pace 
of ratification of the AfCFTA, FMP, and SAATM. Where relevant implementation activities in this 
pillar should be align with the accession to the WTO and the EAC. A two-track process not only 
delivers coherence, but it would also save time.  
● Pillar 2: Aligning domestic policy & legislation with AfCFTA - provides a set of interventions that 
Somalia should implement to align its domestic trade policy and legislation with what has been 
negotiated on the AfCFTA – Trade in goods and services, and DSM.  
● Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA– addresses the gaps and opportunities 
identified between the current Somalia regulatory and standards regime with what has thus far 
been negotiated under the AfCFTA.  
 
57 FGS (2022) AfCFTA perceptions Survey of the Somalia business community 
58 Ibid  
59 UNDP (2020) The Futures Report – Making the AfCFTA work for women and youth
=== PAGE 71 ===
 
69 
 
 
● Pillar 4: Upgrade Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa– Identifies opportunities to 
align and link Somalia’s national trade infrastructure with existing trade corridors in the region 
and other market access infrastructure – seaports, airports etc.  
● Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA – highlights the opportunities 
to increase domestic value addition to key primary products and how these value-added products 
could expand and diversify Somalia’s exports  
● Pillar 6 -: Enhancing market access & trade facilitation under the AfCFTA – identifies 
opportunities for trade facilitation and market access reforms that would reduce the cost of trade 
and enhance Somalia’s exports to the RoA.  
● Pillar 7 - Strengthening capacity to deliver national AfCFTA implementation strategy – identifies 
capacity and technical assistance required to support the FGS in its efforts to implement AfCFTA 
reforms  
● Pillar 8 - Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA protocols – Provide the 
evidence base needed to Somalia to actively and effectively to implement the phase two 
protocols.  
● Pillar 9 – Enhancing trade opportunities – outlines three key focus areas where Somalia can 
enhance its trade and industrial development under the AfCFTA.  
 
Cross cutting themes  
Implementation of the EAC-AfCFTA strategy need to consider the mainstreaming of the following for the 
strategy to deliver inclusive outcomes for members States and the region.  
● Equitable participation by all (women, youth and PWD) – Trade can play an important role in 
creating opportunities for often marginalized groups like women, youth and PWDs to benefit and 
enhance their livelihoods. Nevertheless, is also important to recognize that these groups are often 
left out of trade and if they are involved, they are relegated to aspects of the trade value chain - 
where there are fewer returns or benefits. In implementing this strategy it’s important to 
understand how various barriers that affected these groups and limit their effective participation 
in trade are addressed in every intervention.  
● Embed equitable digitization across all interventions - The success of AfCFTA depends on how 
effectively the continent and members states (in particular) embrace the use of technology and 
digital innovations to simplify trade and reduce the cost of trading. key technologies like the 
Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Blockchain and Big Data must be central to the 
monitoring and evaluation on the performance of intra-Africa trade. Through these technologies, 
the continent can capture the trade movements across the continent, international trade data 
and capital movements, fiscal statistics and more importantly, food production and consumption, 
to understand the supply chains and exploit the continent’s land and labour resources. Somalia is 
already on the path to digitizing its trade with the implementation of the (i) online trade 
information portal, (ii) the online business registration and licensing system, (iii) the launch of the 
customs revenue systems are all strong signs of the importance the FGS has given to the use of 
technology and digital platforms.  
● Compliance with international practice on safe trade – The covid 19 pandemic highlighted how 
easily trade can be disrupted by global pandemics. In addition, trade reforms that facilitate the 
free movement of people and goods can also be exploited by nefarious entities to undertake 
illegal activities such as smuggling, trafficking of people and drugs, slave labour etc. Somalia has a 
significant amount of its trade that is informal especially at its land borders with Kenya, Ethiopia 
and Djibouti. This trade is important to millions of women and small business owners and if 
disrupted by illegal activities, then their livelihoods will be significantly impacted. It’s therefore
=== PAGE 72 ===
 
70 
 
 
important that these potential negative effects of trade are considered and adequately addressed 
when implementing this strategy in order to ensure the smooth flow of trade and its resulting 
benefits.  
● Embed climate resilience and environmental safeguards in all interventions - Climate change is 
expected to have severe impacts across the globe – rising temperatures and seas, unpredictable 
weather, all of which will severely disrupt economic activity and life as we know it. Most of the 
African Economies are still agrarian based and dependent and hence changes in clime will have a 
significant impact. Most Africa agriculture is still rain fed and hence susceptible to climate 
variability – droughts and floods.  Somalia is one of the most climate distressed countries on the 
continent. Over the last 30 years, it has experienced cyclical periods of droughts which have 
affected its agriculture sector on which it depends for trade and incomes for millions of its people. 
As such, it’s imperative that the implementation of this AfCFTA and other trade strategies do not 
encourage, and support trade related economic activities that would undermine Somalia’s 
climate resilience and environmental safeguards.  
 
Outputs  
The outputs statements outlined below are not conclusive given that extensive reforms and interventions 
will need to be implemented to make the AfCFTA a tangible and practical reality within Somalia.   
 
Output 1 - Increased awareness of the AfCFTA by all relevant stakeholders  
The perceptions survey conducted for this strategy has provided evidence of the significant gap that still 
needs to be addressed to increase awareness of the AfCFTA. A large swathe of the Somalia private sector 
has indicated that they need more information on the operational and technical instruments of the 
AfCFTA. This lack of awareness is bound to limit and reduce interest and participation in intra Africa trade 
and those companies that take advantage of the free trade area that has been created. It is therefore 
important for a sustained and coherent awareness and communication strategy to be implemented to 
forestall the potential underutilisation of the AfCFTA trade framework.  
 
Output 2 – Conclusion of ratification and accession processes  
NTBs and NTMs remain a major barrier to increasing the levels of intra-African trade and investments. 
UNCTAD (2018) estimates that NTBs are at least three times more restrictive than regular customs 
duties60. The report suggests that African countries could gain US$ 20 billion in GDP growth by tackling 
such barriers at the continental level61. Somalia has embarked on several trade reforms reduce the 
incidence of NTBs and to facilitate the flows of trade. The ratification of the AfCFTA and other related 
regional trade agreements should help address the NTBS that arise from the variance between Somali 
trade regime and that of the AfCFTA to unlock trade potential and or competitiveness.  
 
Output 3 – Protocols on investment, competition, digital trade, Intellectual Property and women and 
youth in trade are agreed and ratified 
The ongoing phase two AfCFTA negotiations on investment competition, digital trade, Intellectual 
property and women and youth in trade are critical to unlocking the long-term potential of the continent’s 
economies especially in relation to diversification, industrialisation, and increased value addition. In 
particular, the COVID- 19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of e-commerce, digital trade, and 
payments systems. The focus on digital trade will include efforts to speed up customs clearance 
 
60 UNCTAD (2018) Lifting the CFTA and ACP trade to another level: UCTAD research paper No 14 
61 Ibid
=== PAGE 73 ===
 
71 
 
 
procedures between countries, with border delays currently slowing down regional trade. Equally, the 
implementation of the investment, competition and IP protocols would help drive increased intra Africa 
trade in goods and services that would provide the platform for the recovery from the pandemic. The 
specific protocol on women and youth in trade will ensure that their effective participation and 
beneficiation are locked into the treaty.  
 
Output 4 – No of laws enacted, policies and strategies developed to enhance AfCFTA trade  
There are several gaps in Somalia’s trade framework that need to be filled and or aligned with the AfCFTA 
if Somalia is to expand its trade with the rest of the continent. This strategy has identified these reform 
areas or opportunity to enact new trade policies that would enhance Somalis active participation in intra-
African trade. Examples, include (i) implementing ICBT trade policies and regimes that facilitate this 
important trade and provide data critical to its effective management and regulation; (ii) aligning domestic 
standards to regional and continental standards that would enhance market access but also limit 
unscrupulous activities like dumping.  
 
Output 5 – Increased availability of trade data and evidence base  
There is limited availability of trade data to support policy making. Somalia has identified this a gap that 
needs to be addressed. The interventions proposed in this strategy will need to include components that 
strengthen or create opportunities to enhance the availability of data of create the evidence base needed 
to support policy development and implementation.   
 
Output 6 – No of trade processes that have been simplified and digitised.  
Trade facilitation that focuses on simplification and digitisation of the trade experience has the potential 
to transform Somalia trade competitiveness. Somalia has already made progress on this front with the 
introduction of the trade information portal, the customs reform processes that are being implemented 
to improve enforcement mechanisms at major ports and airports, while strengthening the capacity of the 
customs administration. 
 
0utput 7 – No of value addition industries meeting domestic and export demand. 
The Somalia National Development Plan 2020 to 2024 highlights the need to develop its value addition 
capacity especially in sectors where it has a competitive and comparative advantage – for example 
livestock, crop, and fish processing. There is a need to develop a manufacturing’s strategy that incentivises 
domestic capacity to add value which in turn creates the capacity to export and reduce the unsustainable 
trade deficit.  
 
Outcome statements  
The following outcome statements are proposed and would be further detailed in results framework 
section of this report. They are expected to provide an indication of the medium-term results achieved 
following the effective implementation of the EAC- AfCFTA strategy.  
Outcome 1 – Somalia ratifies AfCFTA, SAATM, FMP 
Somalia is in the process of ratifying the AfCFTA and other associated agreements – FMP and the SAATM. 
The Free Movement of Persons (FMP) protocol is key to the effective implementation of the AfCFTA and 
the realisation of the benefits that would accrue for African economies and people. Compared to other 
continental type regional economic communities, intra-African travel is significantly restricted by visa 
requirements. Somalia already has one of the most liberalised visa regimes in Africa. It offers a visa on
=== PAGE 74 ===
 
72 
 
 
arrival for 52 of the 54 African countries and yet this has not been reciprocated62. Somalians only enjoy 
visa free travel to 3 countries, receive visa on arrival in 11 countries and are required to apply for visas 
before travel for 39 countries. This situation affects the ability of Somali traders, businessmen and 
investors to access markets and opportunities ion the continent and needs to be resolved if the AfCFTA is 
to deliver tangible benefits for them and the country. Ratification of the FMP protocol will precipitate the 
provision of reciprocal visa regimes between member countries that have ratified the agreement. 
Similarly, SAATM aims to liberalise civil aviation in Africa and be an impetus to the continent’s economic 
integration and the free movement of people. Open skies in Africa will contribute to general aviation 
sector economic growth with those in the service, management and maintenance industries receiving a 
boost.  By ratifying the agreement Somalia will be able to harmonise its air service agreements and 
increase opportunities to enhance its access to the rest of the continent. This strategy highlights the need 
to these reforms to be fast-tracked to ensure uniform beneficiation for communities in the region. 
 
 
Outcome 2 - Increased Somalia trade and investment flows with the African Continent 
The bulk of Somalia’s trade is with countries outside the continent. Trade represents almost 50% of GDP 
with imports contributing 40% and exports 10% in 201963. The top export markets are Saudi Arabia, Oman, 
United Arab Emirates, and Yemen, with Djibouti the only African country in the top ten export 
destinations. The top import origins of Somalia are the United Arab Emirates (30%), Ethiopia (12%), India 
(9%), China (7%), while Kenya and Oman have a share of (6%) of Somali Imports64. In this case Kenya and 
Ethiopia are in the top ten import sourcing markets for Somalia. According to UNCTAD, FDI inflows into 
Somalia reached US$ 384 million in 2017 (UNCTAD 2018 World Investment Report), bringing Somalia back 
to a level not seen since the late 1980s. Existing FDI stock amounted to US$ 1.7. 
billion in 2016, increasing to US$ 2.1 billion in 201765. From the investment perspective the bulk of 
Somalia’s FDI is recorded as remittances which is mainly destined to the real-estate, communications, 
transport, and warehousing sectors66.  The major sources of remittances in Somalia are North America 
and Europe, especially the UK, with Kenya as the leading African source. Nevertheless, the bulk of large-
scale FDI funding large projects is mainly from sources outside Africa. Its therefore clear that limited trade 
and investments flows between Somalia and Africa are an opportunity to be leveraged and exploited 
under the AfCFTA. Harmonisation of trading and investments frameworks under the AfCFTA would open 
the countries to increased trade and attract FDI vital to its socioeconomic growth and development.  
 
Outcome 3 - Reduced cost of trading between Somalia and Rest of the World 
Somalia has over the years faced significant barriers to trade that have resulted in high cost of trade which 
in turn have affected its trade competitiveness. Some of these constraints include internal insecurity, poor 
trade infrastructure, NTBs etc, all of which drive up the cost of importing and exporting. There are no 
specific studies that have been undertaken to estimate the time and cost to export in Somalia.  Somalia is 
ranked 164th in the trading across borders indicator in the WB DB index 2020. From the perceptions survey 
for this strategy, most Somali businesses surveyed indicated that NTBs exists, and they were affecting 
both imports and exports. Trade facilitation reforms under the AfCFTA would provide the basis for 
unlocking Somalia’s trade potential and ability to enter new markets on the back of improved trade 
competitiveness. The World Bank has estimated that of the $450 billion in income gains from AfCFTA, 
 
62 AfDB (2021) Africa Visa Openness Index   
63 CBS (2019) Somalia’s trade statistics 2010 – 2018   
64 Ibid  
65 FGS (2022) National Investment Promotion Strategy (NIPS) To Promote an Enterprise-Driven Development 
66 FT (2021) FDI markets database
=== PAGE 75 ===
 
73 
 
 
$292 billion would come from stronger trade facilitation measures to reduce red tape and simplify 
customs procedures67. These gains will require major efforts by countries to reduce the burden on 
businesses and traders to cross borders, quickly, safely, and with minimal interference by officials. 
 
Outcome 4 - Increased industrial capacity and value addition.  
The NDP 9 highlights the importance of ramping up value addition in key sectors where Somalia has a 
comparative advantage – agro-processing, livestock processing, light manufacturing as one of the 
solutions to reducing its unsustainable trade deficit and rebuilding industrial capacity. The NIPS highlights 
the focus on enhancing manufacturing capacity to realize significant export volumes, create more jobs 
and make the concept of ‘Made in Somalia’ a reality68. Increased manufacturing and vale added capacity 
not only helps address the growing and unsustainable trade deficit, but it also opens up opportunities for 
Somalia to exports its value-added products like frozen fish, processed livestock and crop products to 
markets on the African continent where there is demand for them. The AfCFTA aims to create the 
environment and trade framework that facilitates the growth of intra-African trade. By liberalising trade 
in goods and services, it aims to unlock the potential to access economies of scale, expand operations 
cross-border and develop regional value chains that increasingly embed African inputs. Furthermore, by 
accessing a unified continental market, different stages of industrial production along the value chain can 
be outsourced to various countries within the free trade area depending on their respective comparative 
advantages69. Resulting outcome would be a thriving trade in intermediate products which can then easily 
be reimported into the country of origin for further intermediate and final processing. 
 
Outcome 5 – Improved and stable trade environment   
Political and economic reforms are gradually creating a stable environment for economic growth. While 
the country is still battling with an insurgency, political reforms have helped stabilize the economy and 
provide a basis for economic transformation. These policy reforms also provide the foundation for 
effective governance of international trade and financial flows. The WBG (2021) notes that federal and 
state governments have developed a common import tariff schedule, with goods classified according to 
the Harmonized System, that will be applied at all ports of entry, and they are working to modernize 
customs administration70. Somalia is entering into regional and international trade arrangements. It 
returned to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) in 2018 even though the 
treaty still needs to be ratified. Its currently actively working on its accession to the WTO, has applied to 
join the East Africa Community, and in 2020 the Somali cabinet approved the Africa Continental Free Trade 
Area (AfCFTA) treaty – yet to be ratified. These reforms and initiatives indicate a serious effort to create 
an enabling environment that would facilitate economic growth with trade playing an important part in 
the growth agenda.  
 
Impact statements 
The vision and mission outlined above speak of the important role of the AfCFTA in catalysing growth and 
contributing to improving the welfare and livelihoods of African countries like Somalia. As such, the impact 
statements are designed to provide a framework from which the effective implementation of the national 
AfCFTA strategy can be assessed. The following impact statements are proposed.  
Impact 1 – Expanded contribution of trade to Somalia’s GDP  
 
67 WBG (2020) The African Continental Free Trade Area: Economic and Distributional Effects 
68 FGS (2022) National Investment promotion strategy (NIPS)  
69 Ibid  
70 WBG (2021) Trade as an Engine of Grow in Somalia: Constraints and Opportunities
=== PAGE 76 ===
 
74 
 
 
The Somali economy has been on the road to recovery following a period of insurgency that affected 
economic activity and in turn growth and development. Additionally, persistent drought has affected key 
sectors like agriculture and livestock which are the mainstay of Somalia’s exports to the ROW. Over the 
last five years (2017-2021) the economy has grown at an average of 3%.71 In 2023, on average, exports 
equivalent to 16.8% of GDP and imports 86% of GDP72 The economy recovered from recession in 2020 to 
register estimated GDP growth of 2.0% in 2021, driven by private consumption and livestock exports. 
Multiple shocks including floods, locust invasions, and COVID- 19 curtailed the pace of recovery and 
increased poverty73. It is worth noting that the country faces a growing and unsustainable trade deficit 
which if not addressed (mainly through increased exports) will continue to exacerbate its current account 
deficit. The AfDB predicts that GDP growth is projected at 3.0% in 2022 and 3.6.% in 2023, driven by 
private consumption and recovery in livestock exports74. These growth prospects are at risk given the 
following;  
● Inflation was 6.8% in 2022 due to higher food and oil prices because of the Russia–Ukraine conflict 
and drought75.  
● High oil prices will also affect energy supply, considering Somalia’s dependency on fossil fuels for 
electricity generation. 
● Undiversified exports are a key source of external vulnerabilities, despite the recovery in livestock 
exports and other financial inflows. The current account deficit is projected to reach 14.9% of GDP 
in 2022 and 12.8% in 202376. 
Consequently, Implementation of the strategy could provide the basis for increased trade expansion and 
increased revenue generation to help address some of the risks highlighted above. As such, the best way 
to assess the long-term impact of the strategy is its contribution to national growth recovery.   
 
Impact 2 - Sustained increase in income per capita and reduction in poverty 
The insecurity that Somalia has faced since the late 1990’s led significant decline in incomes and rising 
poverty levels. This situation has been further exacerbated by persistent droughts which impact its most 
important economic sector – agriculture where the bulk of the population is employed. A 2022 report by 
the FGS (on the progress it had made in implementing the SDGs) indicated that 69% of the population live 
below the poverty line ($1.50 a day) comprising, nearly seven out of 10 Somalis77. The NDP 9 (2020) notes 
that the majority of those affected by poverty are nomadic pastoralists, agro-pastoralists, and residents 
of internally displaced people (IDP) settlements78. Poverty in Somalia is driven by political fragility, conflict, 
insecurity and exacerbated by climate emergencies79. The IMF in 2023  revised the GDP figures and as a 
result the per capita income at $64180. Enhancing production and value addition in crop agriculture, 
fisheries, and livestock for the domestic and export market, will impact millions of Somalians. Rebuilding 
agro-processing and manufacturing capacity would create thousands of jobs while enhancing access to 
African markets would increase incomes of those involved in the export value chains. Consequently, the 
 
71 National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of Somalia data (authors calculations) 
72 IMF (2023) Somalia IMF Country Report No. 23/187 May 2023  
73 (AfDB 2022) African Economic Outlook 2022 - Somalia Economic Outlook 
74 ibid  
75 Ibid  
76 Ibid  
77 FGS(2022) SDG Voluntary National Review report 2022. It refers to data for 2017.  
78 MPIED (2020) Somalia National Development Plan 2020 to 2024 (NDP-9) - The Path to a Just, Stable and Prosperous Somalia 
79 FGS(2022) SDG Voluntary National Review report 2022 
80 IMF (2023) Somalia – IMF Country Report No. 23/364 May 2023
=== PAGE 77 ===
 
75 
 
 
impact of the strategy can in part be measured by the sustained increase in incomes of those involved in 
export driven industries.   
 
Impact 3 – Enhanced economic and social stability.  
Increased trade can contribute positively to enhancing Somalia’s political and social stability. A more open 
and diversified economy would create opportunities for job creation, increased incomes, and tax revenue 
generation. Increased value addition and enhanced market access driven by the ratification and the 
implementation of the AfCFTA, would help deliver more sustained and inclusive growth and 
socioeconomic development. Improve trade relations with the RoA would enhance and support improved 
political ties and create conditions for greater regional stability.  
 
Assumptions at impact and outcome levels  
The assumptions explain the logic behind the strategy and the causal links attributed to the trade and 
social impacts that the AfCFTA is expected to deliver for Somalia. There several assumptions underlying 
the achievement of the impact goals outlined above. These include the following;  
 
● Somalia ratifies the AfCFTA agreement and initiates its implementation.  
● Somalia continues its trade integration by ratifying the COMESA trade agreement – an important 
step towards harmonisation at the REC level.   
● Somalia completes its accession to the WTO and the EAC
=== PAGE 78 ===
 
76 
 
 
PART C: Intervention Pillars 
 
This section of the strategy provides an in-depth analysis the (i) current state of play; (ii) proposed 
interventions and related outcomes following the implementation of the reforms.  
Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties 
When the AfCFTA was signed in March 2018 in Kigali, two other agreements were also signed, and 
member States were invited to ratify them – Free Movement of Persons Protocol and the Single African 
Air Transport Agreement. To date, progress has been made in relation to all three agreements.  However, 
there are some gaps and issues that still need to be addressed. Under this Pillar of the strategy, we 
propose several policy recommendations that seek to focus efforts on ratification of the above-mentioned 
agreements / protocols.  
AfCFTA Ratification  
As indicated in Part A (AfCFTA situational analysis), as of October 2022, 44 countries have deposited their 
instruments of ratification. Somalia’s cabinet has approved the AfCFTA treaty for ratification, but it is yet 
to deposit its ratification with the AUC. There is strong political will – and consensus – on the importance 
of the AfCFTA in Somalia and it is crucial that completing the ratification process remains a priority.  
FMP Ratification  
The objective of the protocol was to facilitate the implementation of the Treaty establishing the African 
Economic Community (AEC) by providing the progressive implementation of the free movement of 
persons, right of residency, and right of establishment. The Free Movement of Persons (FMP) protocol is 
key to the effective implementation of the AfCFTA and the realisation of the benefits that would accrue 
for its economies and its people. To date only four African countries have fully ratified the FMP protocol 
– Mali, Rwanda, Niger, Sao Tome, and Principe81. Somalia like many other countries signed the agreement 
on the 21st of March 2018 in Kigali but has not yet made progress in moving towards ratification.  
 
Compared to other continental type regional economic communities, intra-African travel is significantly 
restricted by visa requirements. There has however been significant improvement over the past six years. 
This is despite a slight drop in Africa’s visa openness levels in 2021, after some governments temporarily 
reversed their liberal visa regimes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2021 Africa Visa Openness 
Report revealed that:82 
● Across Africa’s RECs, 2021 saw a slight regression in visa openness, parallel to the general trend 
for African countries. However, reciprocity scores have improved significantly from 2016-2019. In 
2021, EAC, ECOWAS, SADC and AMU practiced open reciprocity the most.  
● East Africa is one of the most open regional economic communities on the continent, with 6 of 
the 20 most visa-open countries in East Africa, including Somalia, Comoros, Rwanda, Seychelles, 
Tanzania, and Uganda.83  
● In 2021, Somalia ranked 16th by visa openness in Africa, allowing 52 African countries visa on 
arrival.  Somalia also offers e-visas.  
 
81 AUC (2020) Status report on the ratification of the FMP  
82 AFDB (2021) Africa Visa Openness Report 2021 
83 ibid
=== PAGE 79 ===
 
77 
 
 
● Visa on arrival is an effective way for Somalia – and other countries – to encourage the free 
movement of people on the continent. And, easing visa restrictions is expected to boost intra-
African trade, tourism, and investment flows, while at the same time facilitating the 
implementation of the AfCFTA.  
 
The African Regional Integration Index has an indicator that measures a country has ratified the Protocol 
to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community Relating to Free Movement of Persons, Right 
of Residence and Right of Establishment. Based this index, Somalia is one of the best performers in the 
with citizens from all 53 African countries able to obtain a visa on arrival which means its has adhered to 
the Free Movement of Persons Protocol (Kigali)84. 
 
The Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM)  
Air transport services connectivity remains vital for African regional and economic development and to 
reap the full benefits of AfCFTA. SAATM aims to liberalise civil aviation in Africa and be an impetus to the 
continent’s economic integration and the free movement of people. The implementation of the 1999 
Yamoussoukro decision has been slow and hence the signing of the SAATM was welcomed as the sign of 
renewed emphasis on creating open skies on the continent. 
 
SAATM was launched on 28 January 2018 and currently has 34-member state signatures to the Solemn 
Commitment.85 These countries represent over 80% of the existing aviation market in Africa. In addition, 
18 out of the 34 member States have signed a Memorandum of Implementation86 to remove restrictions 
in existing Bilateral Air Services Agreements (BASAs) that are contrary to the Yamoussoukro Decision87 
(YD). Somalia is yet to sign the SAATM.  
 
The Institutional support for the implementation of the Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM) is 
the first multilateral support received by the African Civil Aviation Commission (AFCAC). The SAATM is 
considered as a crucial logistic infrastructure and a facilitator for the successful operation of the African 
Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) complemented by the Protocol on the Free Movement of People 
and Goods and the African passport. Under SAATM, any current or future air service agreement signed 
between any or all the 34 member States, must be YD compliant and must meet the below 
requirements88:  
 
● Free exercise of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th freedom traffic to Eligible Airlines;  
● Liberalized air tariffs;  
● Unrestricted frequency and capacity;  
● Full liberalization of cargo services;  
● Recognition of the powers and function of the Executing Agency – African Civil Aviation 
Commission.  
● Adhere to the uniform rules for fair competition, consumer protection and other regulations. 
 
 
84 UNECA (2019) Africa regional integration framework  
85 https://www.iata.org/en/about/worldwide/ame/saatm/ 
86 Ibid  
87 The Decision promotes the removal of all restrictions on access, capacity, frequency, and tariffs and the exercise of first, second, third, fourth 
and fifth freedom rights. 
88 SATAAM website -
=== PAGE 80 ===
 
78 
 
 
Somalia Perspective  
Somalia has a widespread air transport sector with 22 airlines operating in the country. Of these, 16 are 
domestic airlines plying domestic routes with 6 international airlines. The country has more than 30 
airports and airstrips that serve domestic and international routes. Consultations with SCAA highlight the 
following as key challenges Somali airline operators face in accessing the continental market;  
 
● High operating costs – Somalia and the African continent in general have some of the highest fuel 
and ground handling costs.  
● High air navigations costs – when overflying the airspace of African countries. For example, Sudan 
charges $2,000 compared to Kenya $150-200, Somalia $275 and Ethiopia $95.  
● Unfair competition – national airlines on the continent receive significant subsidies which give 
them an unfair advantage vis a vis private airline.  
● Airport infrastructure and service – African airports lack the standards equipment and 
infrastructure needed to facilitate efficient operations. Lack of proper facilitation at airports drives 
up the operating costs  
 
Compliance with SATAAM 
Somalia was listed as one of the states with less than 15 BASAs and was ranked last with 0% compliance 
– see figure 34 below. Even though Somalia is not yet a signatory of the SATAAM, the SCAA continues to 
implement the objectives and reforms under the agreement.  
 
Figure 28: Summary of BASA Compliance with YD per state 
 
Source IATA (2021) Continental study on SATAAM & communication strategy for SATAAM advocacy 
 
The IATA study also simulated the potential benefits that would accrue following the liberalization of 
African BASAs. The study found that intra-African air traffic would increase by 51%, from 31.2 million to 
47.1 million. This represents an additional 15.9 million passenger trips that currently are unable to take 
place for reasons of cost, flight availability or service convenience89. The traffic increases in each country 
are a function of how much liberalization has already taken place, the conditions of the aviation sector 
and general economic conditions. The highest percentage increases are projected for Central African 
Republic (102%), Angola (95%), Guinea-Bissau (94%), Algeria (94%) and Sudan (84%) and Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (82%) due to in part to the limited air service and restrictive BASAs the countries 
have currently90.  
 
Based on the above, Somalia could significantly benefit from liberalisation of its air transport market. The 
SCAA expects the ratification of the AfCFTA and the SATAAM would lead to the following; 
 
● Increased trade and investment  
 
89 AITA (2021) Continental study on SATAAM & communication strategy for SATAAM advocacy 
90 Ibid
=== PAGE 81 ===
 
79 
 
 
● Increased job creation – direct and indirect  
● Boost tourism and domestic resource mobilization  
● Increased competition and reduced prices of travellers  
● Enhanced air transport infrastructure  
 
Policy Actions  
Table 8 below outlines the emerging issues and proposed policy actions.  
Table 9: Ratification policy actions   
Issue identified   
Proposed policy 
action  
Output  
Outcome 
Ownership/ lead 
entity 
Proposed source 
of funding 
Somalia is yet to 
ratify the AfCFTA 
agreement 
FGS to Fasttrack 
ratification 
process in the 
parliament  
Parliamentary 
approval of the 
AfCFTA 
Ratification 
instruments 
deposited 
MoCI 
FSG budget  
Somalia has signed 
the FMP Protocol 
but has not made 
progress to move 
to 
ratification. 
Somalia needs to 
make the case for 
FMP 
ratification. 
Where there are 
concerns, 
these 
need 
to 
be 
addressed and the 
benefits 
of 
ratification 
outlined 
to 
facilitate 
the 
process. 
Develop 
roadmap for FGS 
ratification  
FMP 
protocol 
ratified 
by 
parliament  
Somalia citizens 
experience 
improved 
visa 
free travel across 
the continent  
 
 
Ministry 
of 
foreign affairs  
FSG Budget  
A study to model 
the costs and 
benefits 
of 
ratification 
of 
the FMP – full, 
partial, and non-
ratification. 
These will help 
policy makers at 
all levels fully 
internalize 
the 
opportunity cost 
of 
non-
ratification. 
Cost 
and 
benefits of FMP 
ratification 
quantified  
FGS Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs & 
International 
Cooperation to 
implement 
a 
strategy to push 
for 
visa 
reciprocity that 
would open up 
effective 
visa 
liberalisation 
between 
Somalia and the 
rest of Africa.  
Reciprocity 
strategy 
developed  
Somalia is ranked 
as one of the least 
compliant 
countries 
with 
regards 
to 
the 
implementation of 
the 
SATAAM 
protocol 
and 
liberalization 
measures  
FGS and SCAA 
Authority should 
work with AFCAC 
to create greater 
awareness of the 
SAATM  
 
 
SAATM 
awareness 
strategy 
developed  
Somalia Aviation 
sector 
reforms 
deliver reduced 
cost 
and 
increased 
connectivity with 
RoA 
Ministry 
of 
Transport 
and 
Civil 
Aviation 
(MOTCA) 
FSG budget and 
AFCAC 
MoCI, 
Ministry 
of Transport & 
National 
Aviation 
Somalia aviation 
is regulated to 
Ministry 
of 
Transport 
and 
FSG budget and 
AFCAC
=== PAGE 82 ===
 
80 
 
 
Aviation, 
Ministry 
of 
Foreign Affairs  & 
International 
Cooperation to 
develop 
action 
plan to develop 
National 
Aviation/Air 
transport policy 
transport policy 
developed  
international 
standards  
Civil 
Aviation 
(MOTCA) 
Somalia 
has 
no 
aviation 
competition 
and 
consumer 
protection 
legislation which is 
a prerequisite for 
SATAAM 
implementation  
FGS and SCAA to 
work with AFAC 
to seek support 
in developing the 
aviation 
competition and 
consumer 
protection 
legislation  
Aviation 
consumer 
protection 
legislation 
developed  
Somalia aviation 
is regulated to 
international 
standards  
Ministry 
of 
Transport 
and 
Civil 
Aviation 
(MOTCA) 
FSG budget and 
AFCAC 
Limited 
understanding of 
the 
costs 
and 
benefits 
of 
liberalizing 
the 
Somalia 
air 
transport market  
SCAA 
to 
undertake 
an 
assessment 
of 
the costs and 
benefits 
of 
liberalizing 
the 
Somali aviation 
sector 
to 
promote 
increased intra-
African 
connectivity and 
travel  
Study on the cost 
and benefits of 
aviation 
sector 
liberalisation  
Aviation 
sector 
refors 
deliver 
reduced 
costs, 
increased traffic 
and 
better 
connectivity 
to 
RoA 
SCAA 
working 
with AFCAC 
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, AFCAC, 
UNECA
=== PAGE 83 ===
 
81 
 
 
 
Pillar 2: Aligning Domestic policy and legislation with AfCFTA  
 
The AfCFTA negotiations on the trade in goods and services began in 2015 and concluded in 2018. 
However, negotiations on national schedules of tariff concessions and particularly on rules of origin (RoO) 
have taken much longer to conclude. As a  result, so far only limited actual preferential trade has taken 
place under the terms of the AfCFTA, and even that only because of the Guided Trade Initiative (GTI) that 
was launched in October 2022.  
Status of trade in goods  
Tariffs  
Trading has commenced among the GTI participating countries.91 As part of the initiative, it selected 
eight countries to provisionally start trading goods under the AfCFTA on a pilot basis. The countries include 
Rwanda, Cameroon, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Tanzania, and Tunisia. The AfCFTA chose these 
countries because their tariff offers on goods have been fully approved and officially published. The 
Secretariat assists these countries to test AfCFTA rules and procedures on pre-selected goods traded 
among the eight Guided Trade Initiative countries. The AfCFTA Secretariat also published an eTariff book 
on its website which reflects tariff commitments for AfCFTA parties with approved and officially published 
tariff schedules.  
 
At the AfCFTA, there is no agreement on a list of sensitive and exclusion products. The agreement aims 
for 7% for sensitive products and 3% for exclusion. Instead, each country selects its own sensitive and 
exclusion list and submits its draft schedules for technical verification by the AfCFTA Secretariat.  
 
Somalia published its customs act in 2020 and updated its tariff code at the HS 6 level. This is an 
important step towards creating certainty in the application of customs regime in addition to enhancing 
the government’s ability to increase domestic resource mobilization. It is not yet clear whether this code 
has been aligned with regional customs regimes like COMESA or aligned with the EAC customs framework.  
 
Rules of Origin  
Progress has also been made in the AfCFTA negotiations on the RoOs. Rules of origin ensure the 
preferential market access negotiated is granted to goods wholly produced or ‘substantially transformed’ 
in an AfCFTA member state and not somewhere else and simply trans-shipped through a member state. 
Annex 2 of the compiled annexes on the establishment of the continental free trade area provides the 
detailed definitions and guidelines on how the RoO will be implemented. 
 
The latest indications are the progress made in the with 87.7% of agreed tariff lines92 as of February 
2022.  The Secretariat has also published a rules of origin manual describing the rules for the tariff lines 
where there is agreement among AfCFTA parties. There are still some important aspects of the RoOs to 
be agreed. There is still an ongoing debate on the percentage of value addition with some countries like 
South Africa pushing for 30-40% threshold. South Africa’s position is that AfCFTA Rules of Origin must 
 
91 https://au.int/sites/default/files/decisions/41583-Assembly_AU_Dec_813-838_XXXV_E.pdf 
92 https://au.int/sites/default/files/decisions/41583-Assembly_AU_Dec_813-838_XXXV_E.pdf
=== PAGE 84 ===
 
82 
 
 
enable and strengthen ‘Made in Africa, Grown in Africa, Designed in Africa’ outcomes93. The certification 
process, product specific rules, and minimum information requirements have all been outlined. 
 
Somalia has the ratified the COMESA trade agreement, however it’s not clear whether it has ratified 
the rules of origin protocol. If Somalia is to facilitate its harmonization of its national trade regime with 
the AfCFTA, then the ratification of the COMESA protocol provides a stepping stone. Additionally, the 
effective implementation of the newly minted industrialization strategy will depend on alignment 
between the national rules on local content vis a vis what has been stipulated by COMESA of which 
Somalia is a signatory.  
 
Trade facilitation  
Simplifying and digitising customs procedures under the AfCFTA is expected to deliver significant 
benefits for the continent. The World Bank has estimated that of the $450 billion in income gains from 
AfCFTA, $292 billion would come from the elimination of tariffs, the reduction of NTBs (by 75% in their 
scenario – which is very high), and by additional trade facilitation. 94. Annex 3 articles 3, 4, and 5 outline 
the approach on the harmonization, simplification, and digitization of customs procedures and systems95.   
 
The African customs landscape is characterised by multitude of customs systems in operation. The lack 
of Customs systems interconnectivity coupled with delays and inaccuracies in the paper-based exchange 
of cross-border trade data between Customs administrations continues to negatively hamper trade 
facilitation and regional integration efforts on the African continent96. The situation translates into 
unsatisfied traders, unreliable trade statistics, controversies around Member States’ allocations from the 
common revenue pool, and high revenue leakage risks97. 
 
Harmonisation, upgrading and interoperability of customs systems and procedures is vital to facilitating 
intra-REC trade. Clearly, the RECs are not at the same level in terms of customs modernization. This may 
limit the ability of RECs and countries to trade effectively given the different stages of development of 
their customs and border management systems. 
 
The private sector perceptions survey conducted for this strategy has highlighted several NTBs that are 
affecting Somalia’s trade. The barriers identified affect both exporter and importers leading to a high cost 
of trading in addition to reduced competitiveness – see figure 34 and 35. 
 
 
93 https://www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/rules-of-origin-a-key-issue-for-continuing-african-free-trade-area-talks-2020-10-28 
94 WBG (2020) The African Continental Free Trade Area: Economic and Distributional Effects 
95 TRALAC (2018) AUC-RECs Customs Coordination Committee -  
96 WCO News - Customs systems interconnectivity: the challenges and opportunities for Customs administrations in the SACU region - 
https://mag.wcoomd.org/magazine/wco-news-85/interconnectivity-sacu-region/ 
97 Ibid
=== PAGE 85 ===
 
83 
 
 
Figure 29: NTBs identified affecting export trade
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Figure 30: Ease of import or export trade
=== PAGE 86 ===
 
84 
 
 
 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
The FGS is also committed to reducing NTBS that drive up the cost of trading. It has recently introduced 
a single administrative document which is used to control import and export of goods in and out of 
Somalia. The document is used to facilitate import and export and is aligned with a similar document in 
use in the EAC. Similarly, it has developed its own customs management system - Somali Customs 
Automated System (SOMCAS). In addition, FGS has implemented the Somalia trade information portal to 
facilitate cross-border trade and provide more transparent trade information for businesses which in turn 
would reduce the cost of trading for both importers and exporters.  
 
Status of trade in services  
Services trade is important from a development perspective for various reasons. A range of services – 
from finance to telecommunications or logistics – are essential to facilitate all other economic activities 
and are therefore critical to economies’ overall competitiveness and growth. Access to affordable and 
efficient services, through trade and investment, benefits all other economic sectors and improves export 
performance in manufacturing and agriculture. 
 
Services account for 54% of African GDP and for 75% of Greenfield Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) to 
the continent98. The service sector is also an important and growing source of employment. While 
agriculture remains the major source of employment for Africans, in countries such as Angola, South Africa 
or Mauritius the service sector employs more than 60% of the working population99. Services such as ICT, 
marketing, transport, or distribution play an important part in the value-added to the manufacturing, 
mining, and agricultural sectors.  
 
The AfCFTA Protocol in Trade in Services envisions a liberalised African Services market which shall be 
achieved by gradually eliminating restrictions that are incompatible with the AfCFTA Agreement.  As 
part of the AfCFTA, the Protocol on Trade in Services is a first step in the direction of service liberalisation. 
Five of the eight officially recognized African Regional Economic Communities (RECs) have negotiated 
regional services agreements or policies (COMESA, EAC, ECCAS, ECOWAS and SADC). The latest 
information on the progress in the negotiations is as follows;  
● The negotiations on Trade in Services in the five priority sectors: business, communication, 
financial, transport and tourism services are ongoing, and it as agreed that they would submit 
 
98 Keller (2019) AfCFTA and Trade in Services for development – GIZ discussion paper  
99 Ibid
=== PAGE 87 ===
 
85 
 
 
their Schedules of Specific commitments on the five (5) sectors by June 2022100. It’s not clear 
whether this deadline has been met.  
● The AfCFTA website indicates that 48 member states having submitted offers on their schedules 
of specific commitments101.   
● Forty-eight initial and revised offers from both State and non-State Parties currently being 
considered and the request/offer process being at an advanced stage. 
● Negotiations of the remaining seven sectors102 will follow and should be completed by 31st 
December 2022 as indicated in the decision taken at the 13th Extraordinary Session of the 
Assembly on the AfCFTA103.  
 
Somalia trade in services  
While the services sector contribution to GDP and exports may be low, its none the less important to 
growth, and economic diversification. The challenge in assessing the importance of services for Somalia 
in the context of the AfCFTA, is the limited data and analysis of its service sector and exports. In the 
elaboration of this strategy, we have identified financial services a potential area of interest. Somalia’s 
financial sector is vibrant and has produced continental and global financial services firms like Dahabshiil. 
Dahabshiil has transformed the money transfer business in Africa and in many ways is already facilitating 
trade payment transactions. It would be useful for the FGS to assess whether money transfer platforms 
like Dahabshiil can be used to facilitate and effect cross border trade payments.  
Policy Actions  
Table 8 below outlines the emerging issues and proposed policy actions.   
Table 10: Trade in goods policy actions 
Issue identified   
Proposed policy action  
Outputs  
Outcomes 
Ownership/ 
lead entity  
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
Multiplicity of customs 
codes across Somalia’s 
federal 
states 
which 
prevents effective trade 
facilitation 
and 
harmonisation with the 
rest of Africa 
Map custom codes and 
custom 
processes 
differences 
across 
federal states and seek 
to 
harmonise 
codes, 
systems and procedures 
Unified 
set 
of customs 
cides 
and 
processes 
across 
the 
federal 
states  
Reduced 
compliance 
costs 
and 
more trade 
facilitation  
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue 
Department 
working 
with 
Federal States  
Mixed – FGS 
budget, 
World 
Customs 
Organisatio
n (WCO) 
Not clear that Somalia’s 
new customs code is 
harmonised with AfCFTA 
tariff regime 
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue Department, to 
map 
and 
harmonise 
unified Somali customs 
code 
with 
EAC 
and 
AfCFTA frameworks and 
a pathway to AfCFTA 
tariff harmonisation  
Harmonised 
customs 
code  
Increased 
revenue 
collection 
because 
of 
growth 
in 
trade  
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue 
Department & 
MoCI  
Internal 
– 
FGS budget  
AfCFTA 
lists 
of 
the 
sensitive and excluded 
products yet to be agreed 
hence an opportunity for 
MoCI 
to 
develop 
a 
schedule of sensitive and 
excluded product lines 
for 
the 
AfCFTA, 
in 
Approved 
and 
validated list 
of sensitive 
Improved 
domestic 
industrial 
capacity  
MoCI 
Internal 
– 
FGS budget  
 
100 https://au.int/sites/default/files/newsevents/workingdocuments/39710-wd-ext_assembly_au_2_xiii_e.pdf 
101 https://au-afcfta.org/trade-areas/trade-in-services/ - accessed on 26-11- 2023 
102 Construction, distribution, education, energy, environmental, health and social services. 
103 https://au.int/sites/default/files/newsevents/workingdocuments/39710-wd-ext_assembly_au_2_xiii_e.pdf
=== PAGE 88 ===
 
86 
 
 
Somalia to engage and 
influence 
the 
negotiations  
consultation with federal 
state 
government 
agencies and the private 
sector 
and 
excluded 
products  
The 
treatment 
of 
intermediate 
goods 
under the AfCFTA is not 
yet clear.  
FGS to review its new 
industrial 
strategy 
to 
clarify 
it 
would 
be 
affected 
should 
agreements be reached 
on the treatment of 
intermediate goods in 
the AfCFTA.   
Industrial 
strategy 
provides 
clarity 
on 
the 
treatment of 
intermediat
e goods  
Reduced 
cost 
of 
domestical 
industrial  
MoCI working 
with Ministry 
and Finance & 
SOMINVEST 
Mixed – FGS 
budget, 
UNIDO 
Lack of customs systems 
interconnectivity 
may 
hamper the trade with 
RoA 
SOMCAS 
to 
be 
connected to regional 
customs 
systems 
to 
facilitate 
smooth 
customs trade and data 
sharing with will reduce 
customs 
revenue 
leakages  
Switch 
linking 
SOCAS 
to 
regional 
customs 
systems 
is 
active 
More 
efficient 
customs 
managemen
t  
Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue 
& 
Customs 
Department(s) 
working 
with 
MoCI  
FGS budget 
and WCO  
Numerous 
NTBs 
have 
been identified in the 
perception survey  
Implementation 
digital 
platforms that monitor 
and 
facilitate 
trade. 
Systems 
like 
the 
electronic 
single 
window, electronic cargo 
tracking, NTB monitoring 
and 
resolution 
platforms. 
electronic 
single 
window, 
electronic 
cargo 
tracking, 
NTB 
monitoring 
and 
resolution 
platforms. 
More 
efficient 
customs 
managemen
t 
MoCI working 
with Ministry 
of 
Finance, 
Revenue 
& 
Customs 
Department(s)
, 
Port 
authorities, 
Border 
Controls 
and 
other related 
entities  
Mixed – FGS 
Budget, 
Trade Mark 
Africa, WCO 
 
In addition to the above policy actions, table 9 below provides some additional policy interventions 
aimed at getting Somalia ready for the implementation of the AfCFTA.
=== PAGE 89 ===
 
87 
 
 
Table 11: Mapping constraints and opportunities - policy and legislation 
Constraints  
Proposed policy intervention 
Output  
Outcome  
Gaps in harmonisation of Somalia’s trade 
legislation with regional and international 
frameworks 
c) 
Trade in goods & services   
d) 
IP, competition, investment, digital 
trade, and women & youth 
 
There is limited awareness and lack of capacity & 
technical expertise across government to deliver 
on the above.  
- Comprehensive mapping of current trade 
legislation against the various agreements that 
Somalia is negotiating (WTO, EAC, COMESA, 
AfCFTA)  
- Compendium of reforms to 
be implemented  
- Updated and harmonised trading 
regime  
- Development of regulatory 
framework covering all trade related 
laws & regulations  
- Institutional capacity dedicated to 
trade in goods and trades in 
services, e.g. established export 
promotion and IP agencies 
Underdeveloped policies & strategies and 
implementation (trade, industrial strategy, 
investment)  
- Mapping status and gaps of existing policies and 
strategies  
- MOCI to publish to other government 
departments the strategies that they have 
developed to aid cross-ministerial cooperation 
- Initiate consultation process on current and new 
policies/strategy reforms across government 
- Coordination & harmonisation of policy and 
strategy implementation in order to achieve 
coherency across government  
- Compendium of reforms to 
be implemented 
- More structured approach to 
improving Somalia’s trading & 
investment environment  
Underdeveloped incentive frameworks to 
promote trade & industrialisation 
- Comprehensive study to map current incentives 
to promote trade & industrialisation with a 
specific focus on gaps that need to be addressed  
- Effective implementation of 
investment law & regulations  
- More conducive investment 
environment that attracts DDI & FDI 
towards the trade and industrial 
sector  
Limited evidence base to support development 
of good policy & legislation, with disparate trade 
related databases 
- Develop a roadmap on how trade related 
government bodies can improve the collection, 
reporting and access to trade data  
- Recommendations in the 
roadmap implemented  
- More robust trade database that 
meets international standards & 
facilities trade policy  
Limited awareness of existing policy & legislation 
- Develop action plan on how to increase 
awareness of trade policy and reforms across all 
segments of society  
- Number of actions 
implemented  
- Increased awareness of Somalia’s 
trade policy and frameworks 
(survey)  
Opportunities 
Somalia can adopt & benefit from tried and 
tested trade policy & legislation in the region & 
ease of harmonisation with already established 
trade frameworks 
- Compile examples of good policy & practice that 
has delivered improved trade & industrial 
performance in the region 
- Number of policies and 
legislation that could be 
adopted to Somalia’s context 
- Improved harmonisation of Somali’s 
trade regime with the continent  
Significant interest from international & donor 
community to support policy and legislation 
reform  
- MOCI to develop a costed trade reform action 
plan to be shared with potential development 
- Funding secured to 
implement the action plan 
- Improved business environment 
that facilitates trade and 
industrialisation
=== PAGE 90 ===
 
88 
 
 
partners/donors interested in supporting trade 
related reforms, using MoCI annual workplan
=== PAGE 91 ===
 
89 
 
 
Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA 
 
Sanitary and phytosanitary measures in the AfCFTA  
Standards involve and provide solutions to technical and commercial problems relating to products and 
services that repeatedly arise in relations between economic partners104. They cover a range of areas, 
including product specifications, measurement, testing and analysis methods, labelling and packaging, 
management, evaluation, and compliance. The elimination of technical barriers to trade and the adoption 
of unified standards is critical to enhancing intra-African trade. The barriers plaguing intra-Africa trade are 
mostly of a regulatory nature and include customs operations and border documentation requirements, 
rules of origin documentation, pre-shipment inspections, sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS) and 
Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs)105. 
 
The AfCFTA Agreement makes relevant provisions for the progressive elimination of technical barriers 
to trade, notably in Article 4 (a) of the Framework Agreement and Article 2 (b) of the protocol on trade 
in goods. These provisions cover standards, technical regulations, conformity assessment procedures and 
sanitary and phytosanitary measures. They fall under Annexes 6 and 7 (Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) 
and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS)) of the Protocol on Trade in Goods. These annexes 
highlight the harmonization of standards for the facilitation of trade between states. 
 
Most of the African economies are heavily dependent on the agriculture sector given its importance for 
food security, employment, and a source of livelihoods for millions of people. The AU has adopted the 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Policy Framework that seeks to strengthen efficiencies in intra-African 
trade under AfCFTA through harmonization of SPS standards & border processes, sharing of information, 
technical capacity106. Annex 7 of AfCFTA aims to protect countries from risks and facilitate trade; guided 
by the WTO SPS Agreement and ISSB standards. Policy Framework seeks to align African SPS systems 
strongly and consistently with international science-based standards, helping to operationalize Annex 7 
of AfCFTA107.  
 
The ongoing discussions and negotiations on handling agriculture produce within the AfCFTA in relation 
to sensitive and excluded products, food commodities and food security. To date, no agreement has 
been reached on the treatment of sensitive products and countries will be presenting their offers on what 
these items will be. There is a view that this list should be limited to a very small number of staple food 
products108. However, governments may be tempted to classify key commodities as “sensitive” or protect 
them in other ways (use phytosanitary measures), which would hamper trade in high-volume 
commodities109.  Consequently, the treatment and implementation of phytosanitary measures will need 
to be handled carefully given the importance of agriculture exports and food security concerns. 
 
 
104 Diop (2019) Standards in the AfCFTA – She trades policy brief 
105 UNCTAD Report 2019 on Economic Development in Africa 
106 AU (2020) The African Union Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Policy Framework for Africa 
107 Ibid  
108 FAO (2020) The African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement and agricultural development: challenges and prospects - FSN Forum in 
Africa - No.15 
109 ibid
=== PAGE 92 ===
 
90 
 
 
Institutional framework for harmonisation at continental level  
ARSO was established with the specific mandate of harmonizing African standards and procedures to 
reduce TBTs. This in turn would drive growth in intra African and international trade in addition to 
enhancing industrialization across the continent. To achieve the objective of eliminating technical barriers 
to trade, ARSO should be the central instrument for harmonized and accepted standards in all Member 
States110.  
 
The Somalia perspective  
Somalia is seeking to increase the level of value addition of the crop and livestock production. To 
support this increased value addition objectives, Somalia will have to comply with Sanitary and 
Phytosanitary standards in the various exports market it will be targeting. Somalia is a major exporter of 
live animals to the RoO and to some African markets. With the current plan to increase the level of 
domestic value addition on its livestock production it would be important to have an assessment of the 
country’s compliance with global and regional SPS standards.  
 
Constraints  
Following years of political crisis, Somalia’s standards regulation and legislation is outdated and in need 
of reform. Consultations with stakeholders in Somalia (SoBS) and on the Continent (ARSO) indicate that;   
 
● The country’s trade related standards legislations and regulatory framework lags regional and 
international good practice.  
● The underdeveloped standards regime has limited the capacity to add value domestically let alone 
meet the export market requirements.  
● While the FGS has established the Somali Bureau of standards (SoBS), the organisation is still in 
its infancy and lacks the technical capacity to develop and administer regulations and standards. 
● There is limited evidence base (lack of data) to support the development of regulations and 
standards and their implementation.  
● Consultations with the private sector also indicated that there was limited awareness of existing 
regulations and standards.  
 
Opportunities  
The negotiations on the AfCFTA stands are still ongoing and provide an opportunity for Somalia to engage 
either directly through its membership of ARSO or indirectly through its role as a non-state party in the 
negotiations. Consultations have highlighted the following opportunities;  
 
● Negotiations on standards are not yet finalised and hence Somalia still has an opportunity to 
effectively participate and influence the process.  
● Somalia is also able to benefit from and adopt tried and tested regulations and standards with 
already established standards in COMESA or EAC.  
● There is significant interest from international organisations and ARSO to support the 
development and implementation of domestic standards that are aligned to the AfCFTA and 
global standards regimes.  
 
 
110 Diop (2019) Standards in the AfCFTA – She trades policy brief
=== PAGE 93 ===
 
91 
 
 
Table 10 below maps the key issues identified and subsequent policy actions that have emerged.
=== PAGE 94 ===
 
92 
 
 
Table 12: Constraints and opportunities - Standards 
Issue Identified 
Proposed policy intervention 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/ lead 
entity  
Proposed source 
of funding 
Constraints 
 
 
Current trade related 
regulation and standards lag 
regional & international 
good practice 
 
- Map gaps between domestic 
and African standards (with 
ARSO & ASO)  
- Prioritise harmonisation of 
Somali standards with regional 
standards – upon EAC 
accession, Somalia will be able 
to adopt EAC standards as a 
member state 
- Series of prioritised 
standards reforms to be 
implemented by various 
agencies in Somalia 
- Harmonised 
standards regime 
meeting 
African/internationa
l standards that 
facilitates Somalia’s 
exports to the 
continent 
SOBS working with 
MoCI  
Mixed – FGS 
budget, ARSO, 
International 
Organization for 
Standardization 
(ISO), Standards 
and Metrology 
Institute for 
Islamic Countries 
(SMIC) 
Underdeveloped domestic 
standards to facilitate 
internal trade 
- MOCI & SOBS to undertake a 
common-sense assessment of 
what a domestic standards 
regime should look like to 
facilitate value addition  
- Prioritised & validated 
domestic standards 
reforms to be 
implemented & regulated  
- Increased domestic 
value addition 
facilitated by 
effective 
implementation of 
standards regime  
SOBS working with 
MoCI  
Internal - FGS 
budget  
Limited capacity within 
established trade regulation 
& standards agencies to 
develop & administer 
regulations and standards 
- SOBS to identify technical 
assistance required to develop 
and regulate Somalia’s 
domestic & international 
standards regime  
- Fastrack full ISO membership  
- Expand scope of support from 
ARSO, beyond technical 
assistance 
- Number of new standards 
developed & approved  
- Number of SOBS officials 
trained on development 
and regulation of 
standards 
- Improved quality of 
standards regulation 
and compliance  
SOBS working with 
MoCI 
Mixed - FGS 
budget, ARSO  
Limited evidence base to 
support development of 
regulations and standards 
- Develop a repository of 
standards regulations and 
related data that would 
facilitate reforms  
- Functioning database  
- Improved quality of 
centralised 
standards data 
accessible via 
database  
MoCI working with 
SOBS  
Internal - FGS 
budget 
Limited awareness of 
existing regulations & 
standards 
- SOBS to push standards 
agenda within government by 
publishing quarterly updates 
on progress being made on 
standards reforms & hosting 
national conferences with key 
stakeholders.  
- Quarterly SOBS cross-
ministerial & private sector 
publication highlighting 
progress being made on 
standards reforms  
- Number of standards 
training workshops 
- Enhanced 
awareness of 
importance of 
standards in 
expanding Somalia’s 
trade and industrial 
profile  
SOBS working with 
MoCI and Somalia 
Chamber of 
Commerce  
Internal – FGS 
budget
=== PAGE 95 ===
 
93 
 
 
- SOBS to increase awareness of 
standards reforms and 
compliance to private sector – 
providing regular workshops 
with traders. 
 
conducted with private 
sector  
Somalia National Quality 
Infrastructure policy is 
currently under 
development  
- Develop sector specific action 
plan to implement the Somalia 
National Quality Infrastructure 
policy  
- Somalia National Quality 
Infrastructure policy 
- Improved strategic 
management of 
quality standards 
SOBS working with 
MoCI  
Mixed – FGS 
budget, UNIDO 
SOBS is not yet accredited 
and requires technical 
assistance to achieve 
accreditation  
- Develop a roadmap outlining 
the reforms and investment 
required to upgrade SOBS labs 
to meet international 
accreditation standards 
- Develop a human resource 
gaps analysis & action plan to 
build domestic technical 
capacity to implement both 
domestic and international 
standards 
- SOBS achieves African and 
international accreditation  
- Improved capacity 
to regulate quality 
standards in Somalia  
SOBS  
External – Trade 
Mark Africa, 
Afreximbank, AfDB   
Opportunities 
 
 
Somalia in a position to 
benefit from and adopt tried 
and tested regulations and 
standards & ease of 
harmonisation with already 
established trade 
frameworks 
- Request examples of good 
policy & practice that has 
delivered improved standards 
and regulation in the region 
from ASSO & ASO  
- Identified roadmap for 
standards reforms 
developed from examples  
- Alignment and 
harmonisation of 
Somalia’s standards 
regime with 
continental good 
practice  
SOBS  
Internal - FGS 
budget
=== PAGE 96 ===
 
94 
 
 
Pillar 4: Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa 
This pillar provides an analysis of Somalia’s current trade infrastructure, and the proposed policy 
interventions necessary for Somalia to maximise the opportunities arising from the implementation of the 
AfCFTA.  
 
Situational analysis  
NDP-9 outlines Somalia’s strategic commitment to take advantage of regional economic 
opportunities/developments and advance National Priority projects for the Horn of Africa Cooperation 
Initiatives that position Somalia as a strategic hub for trade and ICT in the Horn of Africa region.111 There 
is an existing policy ecosystem for the development and rehabilitation of the country’s infrastructure, with 
corresponding funding mechanisms. This may be leveraged to orient specific outputs and outcomes 
towards enhanced regional trade under the AfCFTA.  
 
National Infrastructure Strategy & needs assessment 
The Somalia National Infrastructure Strategy (SNIS) (2019- 2063) has been developed in a consultative 
process with stakeholders from national and local authorities, civil society, and international development 
partners.112 The overall objective of SNIS (2019 – 2063) is to prioritise needs for infrastructure 
reconstruction to achieve priority improvements in the country, following an assessment of the current 
state of infrastructure (see below).113  
 
According to the SNIS (2019-2063), national infrastructure planning in Somalia at least the following key 
ministries:114 
 
● Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Reconstruction (incl. roads authority) 
● Ministry of Energy & Water Resources 
● Ministry of Transport & Civil Aviation  
● Ministry of Ports & Marine Transport 
● Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and technology  
● Directorate of Environment the Office of the Prime Minister  
Somalia’s Transport Sector Needs Assessment (TSNA) and Investment Programme (2016) has also been 
developed by FGS and the African Development Bank (AfDB), and now championed by SomInvest.115 It 
focuses on demand-based planning for roads, aviation, and ports in Somalia, and provide a comprehensive 
costed baseline for Somalia’s National Investment Promotion Strategy.116  
 
Infrastructure financing 
The Somali Infrastructure Fund (SIF) (multi-partner fund) was operationalised in 2016 and is 
administered by the AfDB. It’s stated goal is to support and accelerate Somalia’s inclusive and sustainable 
 
111 https://sominvest.gov.so/key-sectors/transport-infrastructure/ 
112 FGS Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism, Somalia National Infrastructure Strategy (SNIS) 2019- 2063 (2018)  
113 Ibid 
114 Ibid  
115 AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment & Investment Programme (2016); https://sominvest.gov.so/key-sectors/transport-
infrastructure/ 
116 https://sominvest.gov.so/key-sectors/transport-infrastructure/
=== PAGE 97 ===
 
95 
 
 
economic recovery, peace, and state building within the context of AfDB’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility 
and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019). 117 The SIF’s focus is the rehabilitation and development of 
infrastructure, and related skills development and institutional capacity building.118 The SIF is governed 
through the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility (SDRF) and aligned with NDP-9. 
 
Transport is one of the SIF’s priority sectors (alongside energy, water & sanitation, and ICT). A needs 
assessment has been completed for each priority sector. The findings from the assessment have been 
consolidated and discussed with the FGS and other stakeholders to develop an initial (five-year) project 
pipeline – roughly USD 350 million – to be financed. 119 Table 11 below details current trade related 
infrastructure financing commitments and projects in Somalia:  
 
Table 13: Somalia Infrastructure Funding Projects 
Project/ financing commitment  
Value 
of 
Project 
(USD 
million  
Funder 
Regional Transport Infrastructure  
58m  
World Bank  
Road Infrastructure Programme  
- 
AfDB 
Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project for Somalia to prepare a spatially 
coordinated investment pipeline of economic corridor projects, and to strengthen the 
national government’s management of selected sectors 
63m 
World Bank 
Somali Roads & Bridges Network Projects (listed by SDRF)120 
- 
 
Upgrading of Sinay Market, Mogadishu (USD 125,000) 
0.125m 
SIDA  
Somalia Regional Corridors Infrastructure Programme (SRCIP) including rehabilitation 
and construction of four priority roads identified for intervention 
- 
AfDB  
Construction of Hobyo Port (USD 170 million)  
170m 
Mwani Qatar  
Construction of Garacad Port (new container terminal new container terminal under 
construction in the town of Garacad in Somalia. The new port has been planned to open 
the horn of Africa, central Somalia and the south-eastern region of Ethiopia to more 
accessible trade routes)  
- 
 
Construction of Barawe Airport  
- 
 
 
 
Trade related constraints 
Antiquated & delipidated trade infrastructure. 
Following the collapse of an effective federal government in 1991, Somalia’s current trade related 
infrastructure – road, air, and sea – is antiquated and delipidated, leading to a poverty of effective trade 
infrastructure with the rest of the continent. The ongoing conflict has significantly hampered the country’s 
ability to develop and rehabilitate transport infrastructure towards improving the country’s regional – and 
internal – trade logistics and interconnectivity. Specifically, this has limited Somalia’s connectedness to 
established corridors in the region that link neighbouring countries, namely Ethiopia, Kenya, and Djibouti.  
 
Entrenched insecurity in Somalia has also created several security related bottlenecks across Somalia’s 
trade routes, thereby limiting the trade – regional and internal – maximising potential of existing 
infrastructure.  Table 12 provides a summary of the current condition of Somalia’s current road & bridges 
network, ports and airports, whose development/rehabilitation has been limited by the above 
 
117 https://www.afdb.org/en/topics-and-sectors/initiatives-partnerships/multi-partner-somalia-infrastructure-fund-sif 
118 Ibid 
119 https://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-events/afdb-approves-somalia-infrastructure-fund-16274 
120 https://mpwr.gov.so/en/projects/
=== PAGE 98 ===
 
96 
 
 
constraints. Poor quality trade infrastructure lengthens the time for delivery and increase shipping costs 
of goods, which in turn influences purchasing decisions. 
 
 
 
Table 14: Current condition of Somalia's land, air & sea infrastructure 
Source: AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment & Investment Programme (2016);  
 
Poor quality roads and inefficient custom procedures tend to lengthen the time for delivery and increase 
shipping costs, which in turn influences purchasing decisions. Strong efforts and commitment are required 
to realize the infrastructure capacity and benefits outlined in the AU BIAT and PIDA action plans. 
 
Poor regional connectivity 
Somalia is poorly connected to existing infrastructure and established trade corridors in the region. 
According to the TSNA, the only established trade corridor linking Somalia with East Africa – and the 
continent at large – is the Berbera-Addis Ababa Corridor (linking Addis Ababa to South Sudan in the north, 
and Mombasa via Nairobi in the South). 121 This constrains Somalia’s ability to participate in regional trade 
– limiting the flow, and increasing the cost, of trade with its immediate neighbours.   
 
Significant infrastructure funding deficit 
In addition, there remains a significant trade infrastructure funding deficit (quantify) to target trade 
related infrastructure development and rehabilitation, with limited domestic capacity to implement 
infrastructure investments and participate in infrastructure upgrading. In addition, this contributes to 
forex leakages which are already persistent in Somalia. 
 
121 AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment & Investment Programme (2016) 
Road & Bridges Network 
Ports 
Airports 
Poor network but adequate coverage 
- 21,933km network coverage but in poor 
condition  
- Only 13% paved (2,860km)  
- Condition of paved roads is poor  
- 7,310km feeder roads (secondary & 
coastal) selected for prioritisation under 
the TSNA  
- Many roads & bridges deplorable 
condition, requiring urgent rehabilitation 
to facilitate movement of goods and 
people (farmers especially constrained 
by current bridge conditions)  
Fairly good condition but underutilised 
coastline  
- 4 major deep-water ports constructed 
in 1980s: Mogadishu, Berbera, Kismayo 
& Bossaso and 12 minor ports 
- Only Mogadishu & Berbera handle 
significant volumes of traffic/trade 
- Lack of diversification of ports towards 
livestock/agriculture exports & service 
ports  
- Ports do not specifically serve Somalia’s 
neighbouring countries 
Poor & variable service, repair & 
quality 
- 6 main airports:  Mogadishu, 
Berbera, Hargeisa & Bassaso 
(recently upgraded)  
- 22 
airlines 
operating 
(16 
domestic & 6 international) 
- Airlines hampered by poor 
quality 
of 
runways, 
night 
landing 
& 
air 
navigation 
equipment. 
- 7 major feeder airports but 
only 2 have paved runways. 
- Estimated of total of 60 
airstrips, airfields, & airports in 
Somalia
=== PAGE 99 ===
 
97 
 
 
 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA  
Regional trade corridors 
As already identified under the TSNA and Investment Programme (2016), there is significant 
opportunity for Somalia to prioritise the development of regional infrastructure networks via 
connecting to established trade corridors – and trade corridor programmes – in the horn of Africa (see 
table 13).122 More efficient trade connectivity between Somalia and neighbouring Kenya, Ethiopia, 
Djibouti, and South Sudan, is a critical first step to enable Somalia to exploit local export markets, and 
should spur further growth in regional trade under the AfCFTA.  Somalia’s latest infrastructure 
connectivity gap analysis – TSNA and Investment Programme (2016) –  cites the Berbera–Hargeisa–Addis 
Ababa and the Kismayo–Liboi–Nairobi corridors as the most opportune for investment. 123 
 
Table 15: Horn of Africa trade corridors 
Southern Corridor  
Central Corridor  
Northern Corridor 
Berbera 
and 
Djibouti Corridor 
LAPSSET 
Corridor 
Kismayo, 
Lamu 
and 
Mogadishu 
Corridor: 
Ethiopia 
(Negeyle 
– 
Filtu – Suftu) to Somalia 
(Mogadishu - Baidoa – 
Dolo) and (Kismayo – 
El-Wak – Mandera) to 
Kenya (Lamu – Isiolo – 
Wajir – Mandera) 
Mogadishu, and Bossasso 
Corridor: Ethiopia (Ginir – 
Gode) 
to 
Somalia 
(Mogadishu – Baladweyn – 
Ferfeer) and (Tuurdibi – 
Galdogob 
– 
Galkacyo 
- 
Bossasso) 
to 
Ethiopia 
(Kebridhar 
– 
Warder 
– 
Turdibi) and (Ferfer – Warder 
– Aware – Hargessa) to 
Djibouti (Djibouti Port - 
HollHoll – Dewele) 
Assab 
and 
Djibouti 
Corridor:Ethiopia (Adama – 
Awash) and (Manda – Bure) 
to Eritrea (Bure – Assab) to 
Djibouti (Galafi – Dikhil – 
Djibouti Port) and (Balho – 
Tajoura Port) 
Ethiopia (Harar – 
Jigjiga) 
and 
(Diredawa 
– 
Meiso) to Somalia 
(Togochale 
– 
Berbera) 
to 
Djibouti (Loyada – 
Borema 
- 
Hargessa) 
Kenya Lamu 
Port -South 
Sudan- 
Ethiopia 
Source: SomInvest  
 
Underutilised deep seaports 
Unlike Somalia’s road and air infrastructure, the infrastructure of Somalia’s four main ports is in good 
condition. The opportunity lies in maximising the utilisation – and operating performance – of these 
existing ports and leveraging Somalia’s vast coastline to facilitate an expansion in regional trade. Some of 
the opportunities already identified under SNIS and the TSNA and Investment Programme (2016) 
include:124  
● Modernisation/improvement of port equipment 
● Improvement of port handling speed & reduction of port handling costs  
● Spare capacity of existing ports (capacity of the berths at Mogadishu and Berbera, where almost 
all cargo is handled, is well above that necessary for current traffic levels) 
● Underutilised 3000km shoreline (the longest in Africa) 
 
 
122 Ibid  
123 Ibid 
124 FGS Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism, Somalia National Infrastructure Strategy (SNIS) 2019- 2063 (2018);  AfDB, 
Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment & Investment Programme (2016).
=== PAGE 100 ===
 
98 
 
 
Financing infrastructure development programmes  
There are numerous partners in the international community providing financing and support for trade 
related infrastructure programmes in the region, providing Somalia with several infrastructure financing 
opportunities and options. Some key examples are listed below (see table 14).  
 
Table 16: Infrastructure financing opportunities 
Partner  
Infrastructure development programme 
IFC  
IFC’s strategy focuses on is helping develop assets such as a reliable power 
supply and transport networks such as roads, which are essential for 
economic growth and sustainability and for improving the quality of life of the 
people living within and across the communities they serve.  
AfDB 
The Africa50 fund was established by African governments and the African 
Development Bank to help bridge Africa’s infrastructure funding gap by 
facilitating project development, mobilizing public and private sector finance, 
and investing in infrastructure on the continent. Africa50 focuses on medium- 
to large-scale projects that have a significant development impact and that 
provide an appropriate risk-adjusted return to investors. 
Chinese government/development banks 
The Belt and Road Initiative  
G20 Compact with Africa (CwA) 
Demand driven initiative to improve attractiveness of private investment in 
Africa, including in infrastructure.  
AU Commission in partnership with UNECA 
African Development Bank and the NEPAD 
Planning and Coordinating Agency 
Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA). PIDA provides 
a common framework for African stakeholders to build the infrastructure 
necessary for more integrated transport, energy, ICT and transboundary 
water networks to boost trade, spark growth and create jobs. 
Private Infrastructure Development Group 
(PIDG) 
The Emerging Africa Infrastructure Fund (EAIF). provide long-term commercial 
debt to deliver inclusive and impactful infrastructure projects in Africa. 
U.S. 
Trade 
and 
Development 
Agency 
(USTDA) 
USTDA works globally to link U.S. businesses to export opportunities by 
funding project preparation and partnership building to support sustainable 
infrastructure and foster economic growth in partner countries 
 
In addition, the FGS should consider how to harness Somalia’s significant remittances flows to support the 
development of trade related infrastructure. This could be integrated in the Somalia’s national diaspora 
policy framework (SNDP-2022) and explored through, for example infrastructure remittance bond125. 
Given Africa’s economic development needs, such as building roads, strengthening telecommunications 
networks, and improving access to electricity, diaspora bonds can help to kick-start long-term and costly 
projects. 
  
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes 
Table 15 below outlines the proposed policy actions, outputs, and outcomes – emerging from issues raised 
in the above analysis – towards boosting Somalia’s trade with Africa through trade infrastructure 
development and rehabilitation.  
 
 
Table 17: Infrastructure Policy Action, Outputs, and Outcomes 
Proposed policy action 
Output  
Outcome 
Ownership/ 
lead entity 
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
MOCI to work with key ministries 
involved in infrastructure planning 
to identify infrastructure needs to 
Prioritised costed list of regional 
trade related infrastructure to be 
Improve 
trade 
logistics 
that 
increases the flow 
MoCI 
working with 
Ministry 
of 
External – 
allocated 
budget 
 
125 Rwanda’s Agaciro Fund [5], which has relied on philanthropic donations from the diaspora, and is being developed as a sovereign wealth 
fund with a strong investment element.
=== PAGE 101 ===
 
99 
 
 
facilitate regional trade from 
existing policy framework (SNIS 
2019- 2063; Somalia TSNA & 
Investment Programme)  
developed/upgraded/rehabilitate
d 
and reduces the 
cost of regional 
trade 
Public Works 
& 
Reconstructi
on 
with 
external 
donors 
Map key security related 
bottlenecks in Somalia’s main 
trade routes/corridors  
Real-time digitised trade corridor 
map of the condition of trade 
routes in Somalia  
Great awareness 
of security related 
bottlenecks across 
Somalia’s 
trade 
routes/corridors 
MoCI  
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, 
World Bank  
Explore opportunities to build 
domestic 
capacity, 
including 
diaspora 
investment, 
to 
participate 
in 
infrastructure 
development/upgrading/rehabilit
ation 
Published list of regional trade 
infrastructure 
development 
opportunities for domestic and 
diaspora investment  
Reduced 
forex 
leakages 
associated 
with 
the development 
of trade related 
infrastructure  
MoCI 
working with 
SOMINVEST 
Internal 
– 
FGS budget  
Building 
on 
existing 
policy 
framework, MOCI to work with 
key 
ministries 
involved 
in 
infrastructure 
planning, 
and 
external entities such as TMEA and 
AfDB, to a) identify gaps in 
Somalia’s 
infrastructure 
connectivity 
with 
established 
regional 
trade 
corridors 
b) 
develop action plan to connect 
developing 
regional 
trade 
corridors with Somalia 
-Updated 
prioritised 
list 
of 
regional connectivity gaps to be 
addressed with support from 
public & private sector 
- Identified action plan to connect 
Somalia with trade corridors in the 
region 
Improved 
trade 
logistics/connecti
vity that increases 
the 
flow, 
and 
reduces the cost, 
of 
trade 
with 
Somalia’s 
neighbouring 
countries  
Ministry 
of 
Public Works 
& 
Reconstructi
on 
External – 
World 
Bank, AfDB, 
Trade 
& 
Developme
nt Bank  
MOCI to work with key ministries 
involved in infrastructure planning 
to draw from SNIS 2019- 2063and 
Somalia 
TSNA 
& 
Investment 
Programme to quantify regional 
trade related infrastructure gaps 
Updated, validated & prioritised 
list of regional trade related 
infrastructure 
gaps 
for 
development/upgrading/rehabilit
ation  
More 
efficient 
trade 
routes/corridors 
that 
facilitates 
flow of goods at 
reduced 
costs, 
both regionally & 
domestically 
Ministry 
of 
Public Works 
& 
Reconstructi
on 
working 
with MoCI  
Internal 
– 
FGS budget  
MOCI to work with main port 
authorities, 
& 
key 
industries 
involved 
in 
infrastructure 
planning, to identify opportunities 
to maximise utilisation of existing 
ports 
Series of prioritised actions to be 
implemented  
Expanded 
trade, 
specifically 
regional, through 
Somalia’s 
four 
main ports 
MoCI 
working with 
port 
authorities & 
private 
sector  
External – 
World 
Bank, AfDB  
MOCI & key industries involved in 
infrastructure planning to identify 
potential and existing partners 
that 
will 
support 
development/upgrading/rehabilit
ation of its regional trade related 
infrastructure  
Potential partners identified to 
contribute to the delivery of the 
regional 
trade/corridor 
action 
plan  
Improved 
infrastructure that 
increases the flow, 
and reduces the 
cost, 
of 
trade, 
both regionally & 
domestically 
MoCI 
working with 
Ministry 
of 
Public Works 
& 
Reconstructi
on 
External – 
World 
Bank, AfDB
=== PAGE 102 ===
 
100 
 
 
Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA 
This pillar provides an assessment of Somalia’s current industrial capacity, and the proposed policy actions 
necessary for Somalia to increase domestic value addition and develop/rehabilitate export-oriented 
industrial capacity under the AfCFTA.  
 
Industrialisation in the AfCFTA  
Promoting industrialisation is one of the main objectives of the AfCFTA. By facilitating intra-African trade 
and creating an integrated African market of 1.4 billion people, the AfCFTA aims to provide opportunities 
for African countries, industries, and firms to diversify, specialise and benefit from economies of scale, 
allowing them to become more productive and competitive. The commercial opportunities and 
competitive pressures unleashed by the AfCFTA should also stimulate increased domestic and foreign 
direct investment, which in turn should foster technological upgrading – an important driver of 
industrialisation126. 
 
Under the AfCFTA negotiations, there has been limited engagement on the industrialization agenda. 
There different protocols will help address or create the environment supportive of the industrialization 
agenda127 but at this point there is no structural engagement with industrial development in the AfCFTA. 
The AUC developed the Plan of Action for the Accelerated Industrial Development for Africa (AIDA) with 
the specific goal of clearly articulating the role of industrialization in Africa’s development and the 
achievement of AUs Agenda 2063128.  
 
The interplay between regional (or continental) integration and national industrial policies is not always 
harmonious129. Many African countries already have industrial policies, and the policy tools they use often 
conflict with the goals of regional trade integration. The AfCFTA should include industrial strategic 
frameworks that aims to develop coherent and coordinated industrial policies at the regional and national 
level e.g., incentives for special economic zones (SEZs) and Industrial parks that reduces the race to the 
bottom. 
Situational analysis  
Somalia is transitioning from a state-owned industrial policy to a more liberalised industrial policy. In 
the 1960s, most of Somalia’s industries were nationalised, with roughly 80% state-owned in 1978.130 Poor 
management gave rise to the decline of the country’s industries, and the collapse of central government 
in 1991 resulted in their destruction. The FGS has subsequently initiated the privatisation of state-owned 
industries and enterprises.  
 
Somalia’s Industrial Development Policy (2030) has been developed by MOCI and approved by Cabinet 
in 2021. The industrial implementation strategy is also currently under development. Both are guided by 
NDP-9’s economic development strategy (Pillar 3). The overall objective of the Industrial Development 
Policy is to enhance Somalia’s productivity, boost growth and employment opportunities, and extend 
 
126 https://ecdpm.org/talking-points/african-continental-free-trade-area-afcfta-politics-industrialisation/ 
127 Trade in Goods, Trade in Services, Intellectual Property Rights, Competition, Investment 
128 https://au.int/en/ti/aida/about 
129 https://ecdpm.org/talking-points/african-continental-free-trade-area-afcfta-politics-industrialisation/ 
130 Ibid.
=== PAGE 103 ===
 
101 
 
 
prosperity to all Somalis. 131 Opportunities within the livestock, the livestock, agriculture, and fisheries 
industries are highlighted as key to achieving this. 
 
A key focus of Somalia’s industrial policy and strategy framework is to strengthen and re-build local 
industrial and manufacturing capacity; and increase Somalia’s capacity to produce, and drive foreign 
demand for, industrial value-addition exports. This is to reduce Somalia’s chronic trade deficit and heavy 
dependence on imported intermediate and final products. As such, Somalia seeks to drive both export-
oriented industrialisation (EOI) and import-substitution industrialisation on a dual track. 132 
 
Somalia’s industrial policy legislative framework is also at the initial stages of development, with work 
commenced on the Industrial Development Act and Public Private Partnership (PPP) law. The Industrial 
Development Act will provide the legal framework for the development of domestic industrial capacity 
and include specific legislation for the setting up on industrial, special economic, and export processing 
zones. The PPP law should help shape a conducive legislative environment and framework to support the 
flow of public and private investment in Somalia’s industrial sector.  
 
Trade related constraints 
Very low levels of industrial capacity & value addition  
Industrial production in Somalia is dominated by small-scale industries, with limited value addition. This 
is reflected the composition of Somalia’s trade. Most Somalia’s exports are raw goods: live animals, seeds 
& fruits, lac, gums and resins, fish and crustaceans, animal and vegetable fats/oils, fruit and nuts, and raw 
hides and skins.  
 
Between 2017 – 2021, these raw good product classifications accounted for an average of 64% of the 
total value of Somalia’s exports (see table 3, section A).133 In the absence of domestic industry and 
production, Somalia is a significant importer of manufactured intermediate and finished goods. Current 
estimates from the National Bureau of Statistics of Somalia suggest that the country’s annual import bill 
is 86% of GDP. 134  
 
There is clear recognition and consensus within MOCI – and across the FGS – that the current trade 
deficit is crippling and unsustainable and must be addressed as Somalia opens its market to intra-African 
trade under the AfCFTA. As such, the development and implementation of Somalia’s industrial policy – 
emphasising substantial gains in domestic industrial production and value addition – is a priority across 
several selected sectors.  
 
Limited inter-and-intra-sectoral forward & backward linkages 
The manufacturing sector is particularly effective at generating inter-and intra-sectoral forward and 
backward linkages, creating large multiplier effects, which can act as the main vectors through which 
manufacturing can catalyse sustained economic growth. Given Somalia’s current industrial profile, such 
linkages between industry and interconnected economic activities are limited. In the implementation of 
its industrial policies, Somalia may look to foreign firms (FDI) to create backward and forward linkages, 
 
131 FGS Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Somalia Industrial Development Policy, (2020) 
132 NEC Policy Brief, Macroeconomic policies for growth and transformation in Somalia. https://nec.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/P1-
Policy-Brief_-Macropolicies_Ali.pdf. 
133 ICT Trade Map Data 
134 National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of Somalia, 2022
=== PAGE 104 ===
 
102 
 
 
from foreign investors to the domestic economy, that support efforts to improve the country’s trade 
imbalance and catalyse industrialisation. Targeted FDI to the industrial sector can stimulate local 
production and the development of domestic supply chains through backward local sourcing inputs, 
generate technology transfers, and develop forward channels to local distributions and regional value 
chains.  
 
Low levels of investment  
Subsequently, Somalia’s industrial sector must attract high levels of investment to drive the country’s 
industrial policy aims to spur and support economic growth, employment, import-substitution, and export 
development. Currently, there are low levels of FDI and domestic direct investment (DDI) flowing to 
Somalia’s manufacturing sectors and productive industries. Current estimates suggest that over the 
period 2010 – 2022, the real estate (29%) and communications (29%) sectors have attracted the most FDI 
(see figure 36). This is followed by the transportation & warehousing (27%) and building materials (9%) 
sectors, demonstrating investments in import servicing – the movement and storage of finished goods – 
given Somalia’s high import bill, rather than manufacturing-oriented investment.  
 
Figure 31: Sectors attracting the most FDI (% of total Capex 2010 - 2022) 
 
Source: Financial Times Ltd, fDi Markets 
 
Redundant privatised assets 
In addition, several Somalia’s industrial assets remain redundant following the privatisation of 
Somalia’s industries. This further constrains the industrial capacity potential of Somalia – its ability to 
move into-value addition sectors and tap into regional (and global) value chains.  
 
Lack of industrial data to support policy/strategy implementation  
Targeted policies, measures, and reforms that strengthen industrial production and export growth in 
Somalia must be supported by industrial data. Currently, the FGS does not have the capacity to collect 
adequate data nor require specific industries – either operating for the domestic or export market – to 
report timely and complete data. Such data gaps in productive industries weaken the effective 
implementation of Somalia’s industrial policy and strategies.
=== PAGE 105 ===
 
103 
 
 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA  
Value added agriculture (livestock & crops) & the blue economy (fisheries) for export 
Somalia has the greatest opportunities for value addition, and export trade & diversification potential, 
in agriculture (livestock & crops) and the blue economy (fishing). These are areas where Somalia 
currently has a comparative advantage. Under the AfCFTA, the targeting of untapped African markets for 
these products presents huge opportunities for Somalia.  
 
Livestock 
The targeting of African meat and dairy markets provides significant opportunities for Somalia to add 
value to its diary and livestock products for export under the AfCFTA. Somalia is a considerable livestock 
producer with a total livestock population of almost 40,000,000 including camels, cattle, sheep, and 
goat).135 Despite this, Somalia is a significant importer of diary-based products. Hence, there is huge 
potential to attract investments in developing domestic diary processing capabilities – canning, packaging, 
branding & marketing – and the production and supply of fresh milk. The development of Somalia’s meat 
and leather (hides and skins) processing capabilities also have huge potential to drive value addition and 
export diversification in Somalia.  
Crops  
Un-cultivated land, and high levels of post-harvest losses, present opportunities for Somalia to diversify 
crop production and expand its domestic agro-processing and storage capabilities towards value added 
exports.  
 
Fisheries 
There is strong growth in the demand for locally produced fish in Africa. With 3,333 kilometres of 
coastline – the largest on the continent – Somalia is well positioned to exploit such demand and supply 
frozen fish and value-added fish export products to untapped regional markets. This requires the 
formalisation of Somalia’s blue economy and the development and advancement of the fisheries supply 
chain.  
 
The FGS is already making progress in this direction. In 2019, the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine 
Resources granted 31 fishing licenses to the China Overseas Fishing Association to improve sector 
regulation, and to generate revenues. The Ministry has also reserved 24 nautical miles (44 km) of coastline 
for local fishermen, supporting the commencement of formal fish exports to Kenya.136  Table 16 below 
details specific investment opportunities to drive export expansion and value-addition in fisheries, as 
already identified by SomInvest. 
 
Table 18:Key value addition & diversification opportunities for exports 
Livestock  
Crops  
Fisheries 
- 
Investment in milk processing  
- 
Investment in dairy farming  
- 
Investments inlotfeeding 
- 
Investments in Meat processing 
plants 
- 
Diagnoses, 
Vaccinates, 
Treats 
livestock 
- 
Investments in Agricultural equipment leasing 
services in partnership with Somali commercial 
banks 
- 
Establishment of Agro-processing industries and 
expansion 
of 
existing 
ones, 
particularly 
investments in the sesame value chain (hulling, 
hosting, tahini etc) 
- 
Value 
chain 
development 
- 
Investment in deep 
sea fishing 
- 
Marine 
products 
cold storage 
 
135 https://sominvest.gov.so/key-sectors/livestock/ 
136 https://sominvest.gov.so/key-sectors/fisheries/
=== PAGE 106 ===
 
104 
 
 
- 
Poultry Farms- Hatcheries for the 
production of chicken for both 
domestic consumptions are under-
exploited 
- 
Compound 
Animal 
Feed 
Processing Plant for poultry, beef 
and dairy 
- 
Investments in Leather processing 
and Manufacturing of leather 
products 
 
- 
Establishment of agricultural processing zones 
and industrial parks to add value to farm produce 
- 
Irrigation 
infrastructure 
development 
and 
management at Shabelle and Juba valleys 
- 
Investments in Sugar Processing 
- 
Dried and fresh lemon/ lime value chain sector 
investment 
- 
Investment to expand Banana & Tomato 
Production and Processing 
- 
Date palm and cowpea value chain sectors 
investment 
- 
Honey production 
- 
Frankincense value chain and export investment 
- 
Cotton production and value chain investment 
- 
Investments in pesticides controls services 
- 
Cold 
storage/refrigerated 
transport 
for 
perishable products 
- 
Investments in Green houses 
- 
Investments in large scale irrigation schemes and 
services to enhance agricultural productivity 
 
- 
Marine 
resource 
processing 
- 
Boat building and 
repairs 
- 
Marine 
skill 
development 
centers 
- 
Marine equipment 
and supplies 
- 
Investments 
in 
marine 
product 
packaging 
- 
Investments 
in 
fishing 
and 
Aquaculture 
farming 
 
Source: SomInvest 
 
The identification and publication of such opportunities must now be supported by a specific industrial 
incentive regime – tax exemptions, tax reductions, subsidies, or long-term interest-free financial support 
– and reform of the legislative and regulatory investment framework that facilitate investment towards 
value-addition in priority sectors. Both have been identified in chapter 18 of the Industrial Development 
Policy and their implementation must now be prioritised.137 This model and regime must also favour 
targeted investments for export markets in the medium term to long term.  
 
Import-substitution to address trade deficit  
A clear strategy on import substitution – in addition to building industrial and manufacturing export 
capacity – will be required as Somalia implements the AfCFTA. Specifically in the context of Somalia’s 
chronic import-dependency and weak industrial base, initial emphasis must be placed on the import 
substitution of (first) both raw and intermediate goods. The institution of import restrictions – for 
example, custom duties and import bands on selected goods – that encourage the development of 
Somalia’s domestic productive capacity is a necessary first step. This should allow Somali firms to develop 
productive capacity, and test their products in the domestic market, prior to seeking export markets that 
require the meeting of strict regional and international standards. As such, import substitution must as a 
steppingstone for Somalia to reach the EAC export market, and then the wider African market in the 
AfCFTA.  
Special economic zones  
Continued efforts to develop industrial and special economic zones (SEZs) in Somalia will be necessary 
to support industrial capacity and drive export-led growth. SEZs can be a highly effective instrument to 
attract FDI and DDI through incentive structures, build domestic industrial capacity, and develop 
 
137 FGS Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Somalia Industrial Development Policy, (2020); https://sominvest.gov.so/key-
sectors/manufacturing/
=== PAGE 107 ===
 
105 
 
 
manufacturing hubs for exporting purposes. With the support of UNIDO, Somalia is working in a phased 
approach to establish SEZs in federal member states.138 A strategic framework for the development of 
SEZs has already been finalised and approved by the Council of Ministers in 2021, with a National 
Preferability Study for the development of SEZs completed in 2022.139 Core areas of the six point action 
plan include: prioritise the development of SEZs (1), standardise processes and establish transactions and 
advisory support services (2), establish guidelines on environment and social management (3), establish 
fiscal legal, and institutional & regulatory system (4), raise finance (5), and encourage private sector 
participation (6).140 Progress towards completion of the action plan must consider specific opportunities 
under the AfCFTA. This includes, for example, the strategic location of SEZs near Somalia’s ports that are 
ideally positioned to serve African markets along the East African seacoast.  
Public-Private partnerships  
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are an important mechanism to drive major capital investment in the 
development of Somalia’s industrial base and productive capacities, with both private and public 
investment and support necessary to meet such investment needs. PPPs provide a key opportunity to 
engage the private sector in supporting the rejuvenation and rehabilitation of state owned, or redundant 
industrial assets, that have been inactive since the country’s industrial collapse and subsequent move 
towards privatisation. This is especially given the need to address perceived high investment risks in 
Somalia.  
 
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes 
Table 17 below outlines the proposed policy actions, outputs, and outcomes, emerging from the above 
assessment towards enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA.  
 
Table 19: Enhanced Industrial Capacity Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Proposed policy action  
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/ 
lead 
entity 
Proposed 
source 
of funding 
MoCI to develop an action plan 
to implement 
recommendations in existing 
industrial strategy  
Series of prioritised 
actions with clear 
allocation of 
responsibilities & 
sources of financing 
for implementation  
Greater clarity on 
Somalia’s industrial 
development 
agenda  
MoCI working with 
private sector  
Internal 
– 
FGS 
budget  
MoCI to fast-track 
development of Somalia PPP 
law with a view to facilitating 
the disposal of redundant state 
industrial assets. 
 
Agreements reached 
with assets owners to 
revive 
industrial 
production  
Increased 
industrial 
production 
capacity  
MoCI working with 
SOMINVEST 
and 
private sector  
External – UNECA  
Operationalise incentives 
national investment policy that 
would drive FDI & DDI towards 
industrialisation, including SEZs 
Industrial 
incentive 
regime established to 
facilitate 
increased 
value 
addition 
in 
priority sectors  
Increased 
investment 
in 
industrial capacity 
in priority sectors   
MoCI working with 
Ministry 
of 
Finance, Revenue 
and 
Customs 
Department(s), 
and SOMINVEST 
Mixed 
– 
FGS 
budget, UNCTAD  
 
138 UNIDO PSDP appealed interventions: macro level (2022 – 2025) 
139 UNIDO Somalia Programme (2022) 
140 Ibid
=== PAGE 108 ===
 
106 
 
 
Assessment of how Somalia’s 
industries could be linked into 
regional value chains so to 
access technology and expand 
industrial 
capacity 
that 
generates 
growth 
across 
sectors, including SEZs 
Action 
plan 
of 
identified 
opportunities 
for 
Somalia to link into 
regional value chains 
and 
included 
in 
industrial policy   
Integration 
into 
regional 
value 
chains 
– 
strengthening 
domestic industrial 
capacity 
MoCI working with 
private sector  
External – UNIDO, 
UNCTAD  
Develop 
framework 
that 
facilitates 
industrial 
data 
collection that will facilitate 
implementation of policy and 
strategies 
Roadmap 
for 
implementing 
increased 
industrial 
data collection  
Improved enabling 
environment 
for 
industrial 
investment 
and 
more 
informed 
industrial 
policy 
making 
MoCI 
& 
SNBS 
working 
with 
private sector  
External – UNIDO  
Develop 
a 
national 
agro-
processing strategy linked to 
off-setting 
imports 
and 
expanding value added exports 
in sectors where Somalia has a 
comparative 
advantage 
(livestock, fisheries)  
Action 
plan 
for 
ramping 
up 
agro-
processing capacity in 
Somalia  
Reduced 
post-
harvest 
losses 
increased 
value 
addition 
and 
exports 
MoCI working with 
Ministries 
of 
Agriculture, 
Livestock, Fisheries 
& Blue Economy  
External 
– 
FAO, 
IFAD 
Identify 
opportunities 
for 
import substitution that could 
be addressed through industrial 
policy and strategies 
Import 
substitution 
strategy 
with 
identified 
product 
lines  
Reduced 
trade 
deficit 
& 
forex 
leakages  
MoCI  
External – UNIDO  
Identify opportunities where 
Somalia has a comparative 
advantage in exporting value 
added goods  
Export development 
strategy (EOI)  
Increased 
intra-
regional 
exports, 
market 
access, 
industrial capacity, 
and forex  
MoCI  
External – UNCTAD
=== PAGE 109 ===
 
107 
 
 
Pillar 6: Market access and trade facilitation  
Importance of market access  
The AfCFTA seeks to create a single African market of 1.3billion people where goods, services, 
investments, technology and people can move freely.   Increasingly global market access is determined by 
multilateral and bilateral trade agreements that grant preferential access to those that participate.  There 
is wealth of literature that highlights Africa’s low levels of participation in global trade and the low levels 
of intra African trade. For example, UNCTAD’s 2018 assessment indicates that Africa accounts for less than 
3% of global trade. Most of this trade is in commodities and natural resources with minimal participation 
in global value chains which today are driving the trade in goods and services. Similarly, Africa’s intra-
regional trade performance (15%) falls behind other regional comparators - Europe (67%), Asia (58%), 
North America (48%) and Latin America (20%) – see table 18. While earlier statistics around Africa’s intra-
regional trade are not inaccurate, they only, however, account for the continent's formal trade; leaving 
other equally important sectors and factors out. For instance, when accounting for both formal and 
informal sectors, Mold (2022) estimates Africa's intra-regional trade between 27-32 percent on average. 
Using these same factors, the African Union estimates the figures at 20 percent.  Other factors include 
excluding sales of mineral fuels UNCTA (2022) Africa’s share of global import (estimated at 3%) and the 
complimentary between its export and import. When taken for these and other factors the continent’s 
intra-regional trade is much higher than conservative traditional estimates (between 14%-16%) such as 
(UNCTA, 2021). 
 
 
Table 20: African trade with RoW versus intra-african trade 
 
Trade with rest of the world ($ millions) 
Intra- Africa trade ($ millions ) 
 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Imports 
499 
455 
491 
68.7 
57.4 
62.4 
Exports 
365 
339 
420 
68.6 
63.9 
68.0 
Source: Extracted from ITC trade map 
 
 
Africa’s poor performance can be explained by a number of factors; 
● Most African countries are still heavily dependent on commodity exports with limited 
diversification or value addition.  
● Trading with Africa is still costly compared to other regions. In particular, the cost of moving goods 
from the interior to the ports is expensive and hence makes African exports uncompetitive. 
● Poor infrastructure (roads, rail, air, water) hampers trade between Africa countries and increases 
cost of trading with the rest of the world.  
● The multiplicity membership of African regional economic communities and their overlapping 
nature inadvertently creates new tariff and non-tariff barriers that limit both intra and extra 
regional trade.  
● While there has been improvement in industrial policy, it has not been coordinated at regional 
and continental level. This has therefore made it difficult for African countries to add value to 
their exports or develop local industries that could participate in global value chains. 
  
Importance of trade facilitation  
Regional integration is crucial to reducing non-tariff barriers and improving cross-border infrastructure 
and coordination, which in turn reduce trade costs and improve trade performance. A key commitment 
in all RECs is the reduction or elimination of any impediments to trade. These impediments include both
=== PAGE 110 ===
 
108 
 
 
tariff and non-tariff barriers (NTBs). The latter is of specific interest given that tariffs in the region have 
fallen because of various rounds of WTO led tariff reductions. As such, most trade facilitation measures 
are targeted at eliminating or reducing NTBs; harmonisation of trade regimes, building capacity of 
institutions responsible for trade, building infrastructure to facilitate trade, leveraging technology to 
simplify and re-engineer systems and procedures and ensuring inclusive outcomes in the implementation 
of trade policy. 
 
The Somalia perspective  
The Somalia private sector perception survey has highlighted the numerous NTBs that are affecting its 
trade both internally and with the rest of the continent. Firms have highlighted several trade facilitation 
barriers that constraint their access to markets (both domestic and foreign) that would need to be 
eliminated.  
 
Constraints  
The consultations undertaken for this strategy highlighted the following constraints.  
● There are significant NTBs, NTMs that affect Somalia’s with no mechanism in place to monitor 
these barriers for relevant authorities to address them.  
● Consultations also revealed that because of the NTBs the cost of trading in Somalia was high 
comparted to other countries in the region.  
● Lack of compliance and enforcement of domestic, regional, and international standards which 
then restricts market access.  
● High level of informal trade and given the security situation in parts of borderlands in Somalia, 
the FGS has limited ability to record this trade. There is a view that Somalia’s trade with the rest 
of the continent is understated given the lack of data on trade that has been moved informally 
across border.  
● The NTBs identified in the survey reduce the competitiveness of Somalian exports and hence limit 
their ability to enter new markets. Additionally, there is a lack of data to support market access 
strategies and trade facilitation reforms.  
 
Opportunities  
Somalia has made progress towards addressing the trade facilitation barriers that limit its ability to access 
new markets. Some examples of these reforms include the (i) NTFC, (ii) STIP and (iii) the SOMCAS.  In 
addition, the following initiatives have been implemented in the EAC and have delivered significant 
returns in terms of reducing time and costs. One of the most effective ways of facilitating trade is the 
standardisation and simplification of trade procedures to deliver greater efficiency (time) and reduce 
transaction cost associated with a paper-based system. ICT for trade is crucial to trade facilitation for three 
main reasons; it improves, 
● the efficiency with which trade transactions are handled, improving transparency and 
accountability, reducing the cost of human interfaces, eliminating delays and reducing the scope 
for corrupt interactions between traders and officials. 
● coordination between different actors in the trade management process, particularly between 
government agencies within supply chain model between producers and consumers; 
● the information and knowledge about trade processes and markets which are available to 
businesses, enabling them to manage consignments more efficiently and to enter new markets at 
lower risk. 
 
There are several software platforms that have been designed to help deliver the time and costs savings 
in international and regional trade. These include the following;
=== PAGE 111 ===
 
109 
 
 
● Electronic data interchange (EDI) – refers to the systems designed to automate customs systems 
to expedite the clearance, and thereby transit, of goods while improving identification of suspect 
consignments and raising revenue collection rates. Examples include the ASYCUDA customs 
management system or tailored systems such as the Kenya Revenue Platform or the Tanzania 
Customs Integrated System (TANCIS).  
● Electronic single window (ESW) - provides the key to simplifying cross-border trade and the 
enhancement of real-time information sharing and exchange between customs and other border 
agencies and private sector stakeholders. It enables the business community to submit 
documents141 to different regulatory agencies through a single point compared to the previous 
cumbersome and time-consuming practice where they had to move from one place to another. 
Examples include the Rwanda and Uganda Electronic Single Windows (RESW & UESW). 
● Electronic Cargo tracking systems (ECTS) – facilitates the tracking of goods in transit to their 
destination and thereby addressing the risks associated with theft and dumping of transit cargo. 
In both cases, if not addressed they have the potential to significantly increase the cost of trade 
and undermine the integrity of the trading system. 
 
Several evaluations have been undertaken to assess the impact of these ICT4trade trade facilitation 
interventions. We present two case studies of the impact of the ESW in Rwanda and the ECTS in Uganda 
(see table 19). 
Table 21: examples of the Impact of trade facilitation reforms 
Country 
& date 
Cost $ 
Nature of intervention  
Evaluation results  
Rwanda 
2012  
$3.3
m 
RESW 
Prior to its implementation, importer, exporter and 
clearing 
agents 
had 
to 
submit 
different 
documentation to a range of government agencies to 
facilitate the processing and release of their goods 
from customs.  
 
To date, the EWS brings together 12 types of 
processes, 28 government agencies (Rwanda, region 
and international), and 520 clearing firms. It’s also 
linked to banks, insurance and telecom operators. 
 
A 2015 evaluation of the estimated that as 
much as US$18 million had been saved in trade 
costs and reduction of delays142. 
 
Prior to its implementation, it took 11 days to 
clear 
goods 
through 
customs. 
Post 
implementation it now takes 1.5 days for both 
imports and exports.  
 
The elimination for importers of the US$50 fee 
associated with securing a tax exemption 
certificate delivered savings of US$2.6m143 
 
Productivity gains were estimated at US$6M a 
year for transporters and other logistics 
providers144.  
Uganda  
2013 
$1.8
m 
UECTS 
The UECTS was implemented to (i) curb rampant 
diversion of goods in transit and related corruption; 
(ii) provide customs with a real-time tracking 
mechanism; reduced the risk and cost associated 
with escorting cargo.  
 
The system uses a GPS seal to monitor the movement 
of the cargo from the start to the destination. Any 
An impact evaluation of the UECTS estimated 
that between May 2014 and October 2015, 
$1.1m in savings associated with cargo escorts 
alone. 
 
Transit time was reduced from 7 days to 2 days 
as real-time monitoring meant there was no 
room for transit time wastage. In addition, 
 
141 Such documents include customs declarations, applications for import/export permits, and certificates of origin. 
142 TMEA (2015) Formative evaluation of the RESW 
143 IFC (2017) Smart Lessons Brief - Taking Advantage of a Window of Opportunity: The Rwanda Electronic Single Window for Trade Efficiency 
144 An increase in the productivity of assets as a result of shorter turnaround times for clearance of goods as well as savings associated with 
lower parking fees, demurrage costs, warehousing rent and storage penalties.
=== PAGE 112 ===
 
110 
 
 
violations trigger an alert that informs the URA of a 
diversion or tampering with the seal / cargo. 
there were reduced fuel and driver facilitation 
costs. 
 
Reduced demurrage charges as cargo left on 
time given the elimination of escorts. 
 
Given the reduced risk, the private sector was 
now in a better position to negotiate reduced 
insurance premiums given that they now had 
real-time tracking of their cargo.  
 
Manufacturers benefited from the elimination 
of transit dumping which was a key concern 
that affected the viability of their business 
models. 
 
 
Table 20 below provides a summary of the proposed interventions for this strategy based on the primary 
and secondary data collection.
=== PAGE 113 ===
 
111 
 
 
Table 22: Proposed policy interventions - Market access and trade facilitation 
Issue Identified  
Proposed policy intervention 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lea
d entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Constraints 
 
 
Significant NTBs and NTMs (non-tariff 
measures) in Somalia’s internal and 
domestic, regional & ROW & no 
mechanism in place to monitor NTBs & 
NTMs (reporting & addressing) 
- Diagnostic study on NTBs & NTMs affecting 
Somalia’s trade  
- Develop a digital framework for reporting 
and resolving NTBs  
- Establish NTB monitoring committee as a 
sub-set of NTFC (including port, airport, 
revenue and customs, border force, and 
security authorities) 
- Roadmap on 
how to address 
and resolve 
NTBs and 
NTMs  
- Digital NTBs 
reporting 
mechanism 
developed  
- Functioning 
NTB 
monitoring 
committee  
- Increased flow 
and reduced 
cost of trade  
MoCI working 
with NTFC NTB 
sub-committee  
External – 
World Bank 
High cost of trade – transportation, 
procedures  
- Audit to ascertain the true cost of trading 
across Somalia’s borders (land, air, and sea)  
- Roadmap on 
policy and 
strategic 
interventions 
to address and 
reduce 
unnecessary 
trade transport 
costs  
- Reduced time 
and cost of 
trading and  
MoCI  
External – 
World Bank 
High levels of informal trade with 
immediate neighbours  
- Ascertain value, levels, and composition of 
informal trade with Somalia’s immediate 
neighbours  
- Develop a simplified trade regime (STR) to 
support ICBT 
- Annual 
publication on 
the value and 
composition of 
ICBT  
- Somalia’s STR 
harmonised 
with EAC, 
COMESA and 
AfCFTA 
- Increased 
awareness of 
the value of 
ICBT and role in 
supporting 
border 
communities  
MoCI working 
with Central 
Bank of Somalia 
and SNBS  
External – 
World Bank, 
IFC, Trade 
Mark Africa 
Lack of data on ICBT  
- Develop framework for collecting and 
reporting ICBT data at land borders 
- Disaggregated 
trade data that 
accurately 
records the 
- Improved 
visibility of 
Somalia’s 
informal trade 
that facilitates 
MoCI working 
with SNBS  
Internal – 
FGS budget
=== PAGE 114 ===
 
112 
 
 
composition of 
Somalia’s trade  
more informed 
policy making 
Enforcement and compliance with 
domestic regional and international 
trade standards 
- Harmonising domestic, regional, and 
continental standards to facilitate Somalia’s 
market access  
- Roadmap of 
prioritised 
standards to 
be harmonised  
- Reduced cost 
of market entry 
and increased 
market access   
MoCI & SOBS  
External – 
ARSO  
High cost of market entry and high cost 
of trade facilitation, with lack of data to 
support market access strategies and 
address trade facilitation barriers 
- Undertake assessment of the costs of 
accessing new markets in the region (Indian 
Ocean States – Mauritius, Seychelles, and 
Madagascar, and states on East African 
coastlines – Mozambique and Tanzania)  
- Market entry 
studies for 
identified 
countries  
- Greater 
awareness of 
costs and 
benefits of 
accessing new 
markets 
MoCI working 
with private 
sector  
External – 
World Bank 
Opportunities 
 
 
Established digital trade information 
portal addressing trade facilitation 
barriers  
- Expand existing trade information portal to 
provide a framework for identifying trade 
facilitation barriers 
- Introduce 
electronic 
single window 
to improve 
customs 
management 
and efficiency  
- Reduced time 
and cost of 
trade 
MoCI working 
with a range of 
related agencies 
External – 
World Bank, 
Trade Mark 
Africa 
Established framework for trade 
facilitation coordination  
- Strengthen the mandate and decision-
making power of Somalia’s National Trade 
Facilitation Committee (NTFC) 
- Number of 
trade related 
issues resolved 
through the 
NTFC  
- Improved 
trading 
environment 
that enhances 
Somalia’s 
ability to 
export and 
access new 
markets 
MoCI working 
with private 
sector and all 
trade related 
government 
entities  
Mixed – FGS 
budget, 
UNECA, 
Trade Mark 
Africa
=== PAGE 115 ===
 
113 
 
 
Pillar 7: Strengthening capacity to deliver Somalia’s National AfCFTA 
Implementation Strategy 
 
Situational analysis  
Somalia’s institutional environment remains at an early stage of development, with limited capacity 
and coordination to deliver the regional integration agenda under the AfCFTA. This includes the 
country’s weak centralised data and statics management. Following the collapse of the government in 
1991, Somalia experienced a period of protracted statelessness until 2004. Transitional governance 
ensued from 2004 – 2012. Since 2012, the FGS – the post-transitional government – has built up 
institutional and administrative capacity, particularly in Mogadishu. However, inevitably, this remains 
limited and constrained given the ongoing conflict and prior collapse of all state institutions.  
 
Therefore, NDP-9 specifically articulates institutional capacity development as a key cross-cutting 
imperative, seeking the provision of fair and effective governance. Pillar 1 outlines interventions for the 
strengthening of government capacity, including the operations of core government, local government, 
and relevant political institutions. This includes a focus on enhanced evidence-based policy making, given 
the data constraints.  
 
Trade related constraints  
Limited capacity in trade related functions 
There is a clear call and need for extensive capacity building in several trade related functions across 
MOCI and the FGS. Somalia’s institutional capacity to develop and effectively negotiate trade related 
agreements, and implement trade related policy, strategies, reforms, and regulations & standards – across 
the FGS and federal states – remains low. This impacts the speed and effectiveness of Somalia’s 
ratification, negotiation, and implementation of the AfCFTA, WTO, EAC and COMESA. Technical assistance 
and capacity building is required in all trade related government ministries and agencies. Specific areas 
requiring further, and targeted, support include:  
● Ratification of all trade related agreements  
● AfCFTA goods and services tariff schedules 
● Effective participation in ongoing AfCFTA phase II negotiations 
● Understanding and focus on the African market (given Somalia’s traditional extracontinental 
trade focus) 
Limited trade coordination platform (National Trade Facilitation Committee)  
Somalia established a national trade facilitation platform in 2020 – the National Trade Facilitation 
Committee (NTFC). Its membership if composed of trade related institutions in both the public and private 
sector. In its infancy, the platform is weak due a lack of cooperation between committee representatives 
and has so far been ineffective in facilitating the implementation of trade strategies and reforms. It is also 
constrained as a mere coordinating mechanism, without any decision-making powers.  
 
To be effective, the NTFC needs to be strengthened and given clear decision-making mandate. Examples 
of good practice in the EAC are national trade coordination committees which are the key drivers of 
reforms (EAC trade related reforms) and more recently, what has been recommended under the AfCFTA 
is the creation of amalgamation of the recommended AfCFTA coordination platform with the existing
=== PAGE 116 ===
 
114 
 
 
national trade platform. From regional examples, success of these coordination platforms depends on 
effective resourcing (technical assistance and financial).  
 
Lack of/underdeveloped centralised trade repository  
Although the collection of statistical trade data has improved over the years, Somalia lacks a centralised 
and digitised trade data repository. This is indicative of the severe data collection and statistical 
management constraints that persist across the FGS.  
 
The collection and management of trade related data is dispersed and fragmented across trade related 
government ministries and agencies, without the coordination and capacity to centralize and digitise 
databases. Somalia’s Revenue and Customs Authority – working closely with MOCI – manages the largest 
trade database (import/export and all related activities). The Central Bank of Somalia reports that trade 
data is available on some other platforms, but that it is a compilation of different datasets that needs to 
be extrapolated. Current practices create difficulties in the accessibility and visibility of complete and 
centralised trade data that would facilitate national trade facilitation.  
 
Opportunities under the AfCFTA  
Access to technical experts & significant donor interest to support capacity building 
Somalia has large young and educated diaspora keen to return and contribute to its development and 
fill the capacity, skills, and coordination gaps. Somalia can also benefit from the large pool of East 
African experts experienced in supporting the implementation of trade related policy, reforms, and 
strategies, namely the EAC and the AfCFTA.  
 
In addition, there are numerous opportunities for the FGS to leverage significant interest from the 
donor and international community to provide Somalia with technical and capacity building support, 
particularly in relation to the regional integration agenda and the AfCFTA. Key examples include TMEA, 
ARSO, UNIDO and the World Bank & IFC. For example, the Word Bank/IFC, in conjunction with the Trade 
Policy Centre in Africa, is launching online trade courses for various civil servants in trade related 
ministries/agencies in Somalia. 
 
Proposed policy interventions, outputs, and outcomes 
Table 21 below outlines the proposed policy actions, outputs, and outcomes, emerging from the above 
assessment of Somalia’s institutional capacity to deliver the AfCFTA National Implementation Strategy.  
 
Table 23: Capacity & Coordination Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Proposed policy action  
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed source of 
funding 
- Identify capacity gaps 
linked to Phase II AfCFTA 
negotiations.  
- Enhance and widen 
training on trade related 
policy across FGS 
ministries and agencies 
- Identified 
technical 
assistance 
requirements 
for Phase II 
negotiations. 
- Increased 
number of FGS 
civil servants 
receiving trade 
Improved capacity 
for Somalia to 
participate effectively 
in AfCFTA 
negotiations and 
implementation. 
 
MoCI working with 
UNECA  
External – UNECA
=== PAGE 117 ===
 
115 
 
 
capacity 
development 
Seek funding to support 
technical assistance to the 
NTFC 
Funding 
secured 
and 
technical 
assistance in place 
More 
effective 
coordination of trade 
policy  
MoCI working with 
UNECA  
External – UNECA  
MOCI to work with National 
Bureau of Statistics to 
develop 
a 
digitised 
& 
centralised 
reporting 
framework for trade data  
Updated 
trade 
dataset 
Improved 
visibility 
and 
quality 
of 
Somalia’s trade data 
that informs policy & 
effective 
implementation 
of 
the AfCFTA 
MoCI working with 
SNBS and UNCTAD  
Mixed – FGS budget, 
UNCTAD, ITC  
Identify 
diaspora 
trade, 
investment, 
and 
industrialisation expertise 
to 
facilitate 
Somalia’s 
implementation of national 
and AfCFTA trade strategies  
Developed 
a 
database 
Somali 
expertise that can 
fulfil its technical 
assistance needs  
Improved access to 
vital 
technical 
assistance 
to 
implement 
AfCFTA 
policy  
MoCI working with 
SOMINVEST 
and 
Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs 
& 
International 
Cooperation 
Mixed – FGS budget, 
IFC, FCDO 
Identifyi opportunities to 
leverage African regional 
integration 
experts 
to 
support 
the 
implementation 
of 
Somalia’s AfCFTA National 
Strategy 
Pool of 
experts 
identified 
to 
support different 
aspects 
of 
the 
AfCFTA 
implementation 
process  
Improved access to 
vital 
technical 
assistance 
to 
implement 
AfCFTA 
policy 
MoCI working with 
UNECA  
Mixed – FGS budget, 
UNECA  
Identify 
prioritised 
technical assistance gaps 
that could be funded by the 
donor/international 
community  
Technical 
assistance 
funds 
committed 
to 
support 
implementation of 
the AfCFTA  
Enhanced 
implementation 
of 
the AfCFTA in Somalia 
MoCI  
Internal – FGS budget
=== PAGE 118 ===
 
116 
 
 
Pillar 8: Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA 
Protocols  
This section provides a forward look at the key issues – constraints and opportunities – that need to be 
addressed to facilitate Somalia’s effective implementation of the AfCFTA Phase II Protocol . This second 
phase covers the following trade areas: Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs), Investment, Competition 
Policy, Digital Trade, and Women and Youth in Trade.  
 
Although Somalia has not yet ratified the AfCFTA, the provisions of the AfCFTA still allow Non-State 
Parties, like Somalia, to participate in phase II negotiations. This is to hasten the process of hamonisation 
between states that have ratified the AfCFTA and that have not yet ratified.  
 
The first option is for Somalia to ratify the AfCFTA and start the process of aligning its national trade and 
investment policy, legislation, regulation, and standards to the AfCFTA. A quicker route would be to 
finalise Somalia’s accession to the EAC which already has an established and harmonised framework with 
two thirds of the countries in the continent under the TFTA which brings together the EAC, COMESA and 
SADC.  
Intellectual Property Rights Protocol  
IPRs are territorial in nature, which means that national laws regulate the conditions for their 
acquisition, maintenance, and enforcement145. Intellectual property (IP) laws may be used as a tool to 
stimulate innovation and facilitate development through disclosure and transfer of knowledge and know-
how. 
 
African firms have not registered enough intellectual property, and the continent is a net consumer of 
exported IP. Africa lags globally in its number of registered patents, registering only 1,330 patents by 
residents in 2017, compared to a high of 592,508 in Asia146. Furthermore, patents are more frequently 
registered by non-residents than by residents147. The net effect is a lack of innovation at the macro and 
meso levels which in turn affects productivity and technology adoption.   
 
Intellectual property in the AfCFTA 
Article 4 of the AfCFTA Agreement prescribes the cooperation of State parties on investment, 
intellectual property rights and competition policy. The inclusion of investment, IPRs and competition 
policy in the AfCFTA architecture is apt. Poorly calibrated IPR and investment regimes and anti-
competitive practices can undermine the benefits of trade liberalization148. Finalization of the IPRs 
Protocol holds the promise of a home-grown, single, coherent and Africa-centred IP regime. The effective 
protection and promotion of IPR is an integral part of the industrialisation and economic transformation 
of African economies. 
 
There are several intellectual property frameworks in Africa at continental, regional and national levels. 
These include the proposed Pan-African Intellectual Property Office, the African Regional Intellectual 
Property Organization (ARIPO), the African Intellectual Property Organization (Organisation Africaine de 
 
145 https://www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/january-2021/afcfta-how-intellectual-property-rights-can-help-create-jobs 
146 Madden (2020) Figure of the week: Patent policies and their effects on African innovation; Brookings Africa In focus Series  
147 Ibid  
148 https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2020/04/article_0005.html
=== PAGE 119 ===
 
117 
 
 
la Propriété (OAPI)), the East African Community Regional Intellectual Property Policy on the Utilization 
of Public Health-Related WTO-TRIPS Flexibilities and the Approximation of National Intellectual Property 
Legislation and the IP Policy of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA).  
 
Made in Africa criteria guidelines are also provided by ARSO. These have been published to help State 
and Non-State parties confirm to IP issues.149 
 
The plethora of institutions is an indication of the potential overlapping jurisdiction and the inevitable 
confusion it causes in the trading environment. The AfCFTA IPR Protocol affords AU member States the 
opportunity to reflect on how best to achieve policy coherence within and among these initiatives. This 
could harmonize the fragmented IP landscape of today while safeguarding national policy space on key 
issues, strengthen the hands of African negotiators in international forums and even help propel currently 
deadlocked international negotiations towards the finish line150.  
 
Why the IPR protocol is important  
● The IPR Protocol can help AU member States ensure that IP policy is applied in a manner that is 
supportive of Africa’s developmental goals.  
● The AfCFTA’s IPR Protocol affords AU member States the opportunity to prioritize areas of 
comparative advantage for African countries in an international IP instrument.  
● Furthermore, it can be used to promote IP rules and standards that are calibrated to the 
continent’s level of industrialization and in line with the AfCFTA’s objectives.  
● The IPR Protocol can serve as a catalyst for technology transfer, technology diffusion and the 
economic transformation of Africa’s economy from one that is primary resource-based, to one 
that is driven by knowledge, information, and ideas151. 
 
In May 2021, the Committee on Intellectual Property Rights was established by the Council of Ministers 
of Trade and State Parties to facilitate the negotiation of the Protocol on IPRs. At its first meeting in 
September 2021, the Committee adopted its Terms of Reference and the Modalities for Negotiating the 
Protocol on IPRs.152 The committee also decided to hold capacity building activities on critical issues 
relating to IRs in preparation for the negotiations and development of the IPRs Protocol. 153 The 
negotiators will benefit from the work previously done by the African Regional Economic Communities 
(the RECs) and by dedicated African organisations dealing with IPR. There is an opportunity now to 
develop a systematic and comprehensive approach for blending IPR issues into the fabric of the AfCFTA 
agenda. 
 
FGS approach on intellectual property  
Currently there is no policy or institution established to regulate or enforce intellectual property in 
Somalia. What is in existence is the outdated 1955 trademark law, which was amended in 1975 and 1987, 
with a plan to have a draft IP law and office. Given that Somalia is not yet a member of the WTO, it has 
not been able to adopt WTO rules on IP. Consequently, Somalia requires significant support in a) 
 
149 Primary data 
150 Wendland (2020) The Draft Protocol on Intellectual Property Rights to The African Continental Free Trade Agreement (Afcfta): Annotations 
on Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions 
151 https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2020/04/article_0005.html 
152 https://au-afcfta.org/trade-areas/intellectual-property-rights-iprs/ 
153 Ibid
=== PAGE 120 ===
 
118 
 
 
identifying its IP priorities that would inform an IP its policy, strategy and legal framework, b) negotiating 
IP frameworks both at the AfCFTA and the EAC (when ratification processes are complete), and c) support 
the development of both institutional and regulatory IP frameworks.  
 
Private sector perceptions on intellectual property 
The private sector perceptions survey for this strategy suggests that Somali businesses (90%) – in 
Somalia and the diaspora – consider the intellectual property protocol as important in fostering 
innovation (see figure 37). It would be important for the FSG to consult with the private sector on the 
best approach to the implementation of the IPR protocol.  
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Table 22 below outlines the emerging issues – constraints and opportunities – and proposed policy 
actions, outputs and outcomes that have emerged from consultations with key stakeholders towards 
Somalia’s effective implementation of the IPRs protocol. 
 
Table 24: IPRs Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Issues 
identified 
Proposed policy actions 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed source 
of funding 
Constraints 
Current IP law 
& regulatory 
framework is 
outdated  
Develop IP policy strategy 
and legal framework  
IP Policy 
strategy and 
legislation  
Creates a 
conducive 
environment for 
innovation and 
industrialisation  
MoCI working 
with African 
Regional 
Intellectual 
Property 
Organization 
(ARIPO)  
 
 
 
External – 
ARIPO, World 
Intellectual 
Property 
Organisation 
(WIPO), WTO  
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 32: Private sector 
perceived importance of IP Protocol
=== PAGE 121 ===
 
119 
 
 
No entity in 
place to 
regulate and 
manage IP  
Assess most appropriate 
entity to regulate the 
sector, learning from 
regional examples 
IP entity 
established  
Creates a stable 
and predictable 
environment for 
innovation and 
protection of IP 
rights 
MoCI working 
with ARIPO  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
Awareness of 
AfCFTA IP 
protocol across 
FGS  
MOCI organise workshops 
for stakeholders across and 
outside government to 
validate its IP negotiating 
paper   
Validated 
negotiating 
paper  
Unified position 
across public and 
private sector on 
AfCFTA IP policy  
MoCI  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
Opportunities 
Implementatio
n of the AfCFTA 
IP protocol 
Identify IP priorities that 
would a) inform Somalia’s 
IP policy and strategy b) 
support the development 
of both institutional and 
regulatory IP frameworks 
Strategy 
articulating 
Somalia’s 
AfCFTA IP 
priorities  
Effective 
implementation 
of the AfCFTA IP 
protocol  
MoCI working 
with ARIPO  
Internal – FGS 
budget 
 
Investment Protocol  
Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows to Africa reached $83 billion in 2021 – a record – from $39 billion 
in 2020.154 This accounted for 5.2% of global FDI. 155 Whilst rebounding from below 3% in 2017, the 
proportion of global FDI that Africa attracts remains low.156 In 2020, UNECA conducted a study to 
understand the drivers of intra African investments flows. The study found that trade openness, 
infrastructure and the performance of the logistics and business environment influence the attraction of 
investment within Africa.157 Based on existing evidence, the study underscores the potentially synergic 
relationship between investment and trade in Africa, if efforts are made to ensure that trade and 
investment are facilitated jointly and through relevant policies and regulation. 
 
African FDI flows are dominated by investment from outside the continent with limited information 
available in intra-African FDI flows. However, intra-African investment is increasing. The AfDB estimated 
that between 2006 and 2016, intra-African greenfield investments grew from USD4 billion to USD10 
billion, while the number of intra-regional mergers and acquisitions doubled, growing from 238 deals in 
2006 to more than 418 in 2016.158 According to Financial Times data, value of intra-African greenfield 
investment has increased by 6% between 2016 and 2021, accounting for 15% of total FDI into African in 
2021. 159 Intra-Africa investment has been driven by private sector companies and in many cases, has been 
linked with (i) regional integration and (ii) national efforts to improve the investment climate. There are 
numerous examples of these – Shoprite checkers, MTN, Standard Bank from South Africa, Dangote 
Cement from Nigeria to name a few. The growing population, and in particular the middle class, have also 
encouraged African investors to venture out of their traditional domestic and regional markets into other 
parts of the continent. Nevertheless, the majority of FDI flowing to Africa remains from outside the 
continent.  
 
 
154 UNIDO (2022) World Investment Report  
155 Ibid  
156 Ibid 
157 UNECA (2020) Drivers for boosting intra-African flows towards Africa’s transformation  
158 AFDB (2017) Africa to Africa investment – A first look  
159 Financial Times Ltd, fDi Markets (www.fdimarkets.com)
=== PAGE 122 ===
 
120 
 
 
Under the AfCFTA, deeper integration (beyond trade) is expected to boost FDI in Africa significantly, 
allowing investors access to a single, unified market of 1.3 billion people. According to a recent World 
Bank study, FDI in Africa is expected to increase by between 111 – 159%, resulting from both increases in 
intra-African FDI (between 54 – 68%) and a rise in FDI inflows to Africa from the rest of the world (between 
86 – 122%).160 
 
Investment in the AfCFTA 
Article 4c of the AfCFTA outlines the specific objective to cooperate on investment.161 As such a separate 
protocol on investment is being negotiated in phase II. Article 3 of the Trade in Services protocol outlines 
a specific objective to foster domestic and foreign investments162. The AfCFTA aims to deepen economic 
relationships between African countries by negotiating provisions aimed at increasing bilateral 
investment. The Protocol is expected to establish a transparent and harmonised continental legal 
framework on investment that accounts for the interests of State Parities and investors.  
 
Most African countries have negotiated bilateral investment treaties (BITs) among themselves and with 
non-African countries. Some estimates indicate that African countries have signed over 1,000 BITs which 
amounted to 27% of the global numbers signed163. In general, these aim to liberalise flows and eliminate 
investment restrictions between countries; and to provide a space and/or procedure to resolve 
investment-related disputes that may arise between entities in the signatory countries164. The BITs have 
been touted as a perquisite for FDI investment on the continent given the risks associated with the 
investment climate. There is limited evidence on whether BITs have been effective in attracting 
investment to the continent165. Studies on determinants of foreign direct investment (FDI) confirm that 
other factors – such as market size and growth, the availability of natural resources, and the quality of 
hard and soft infrastructure – tend to be far more important to investors than investment treaties when 
making the decision to invest166. 
 
The negotiations on the AfCFTA investment protocol began in September 2021, following the 
establishment of the Committee on Investment in May 2021. The protocol was approved in February 
2023, alongside the protocols on competition and IPR. The AfCFTA Secretariat has also facilitated capacity-
building engagements and regional stakeholder engagements to bring together views on what issues 
should be tackled/included in the Protocol. 167 
 
The Investment Protocol is based on the pan-African code. Key elements and focus areas outlined in 
the zero draft include:168  
● Investment promotion, facilitation, and protection standards (Chapter 2) 
 
160 World Bank Group, Making the Most of the African Continental Free Trade Area, Leveraging Trade and Foreign Direct Investment to Boost 
Growth and Reduce Poverty (2022). 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099305006222230294/pdf/P1722320bf22cd02c09f2b0b3b320afc4a7.pdf 
161 AfCFTA Treaty  
162 AfCFTA trade in services protocol 
163 Yao (2014) Third World Resurgence No. 290/291, October/November 2014, pp 5-7 
164 ODI (2020) AfCFTA investment negotiations: Notes on concepts 
165 CCSI (2018) Cost-and-Benefits-of-Investment-Treaties-Practical-Considerations-for-States; CCSI policy paper March 218  
166 ibid  
167 Ibid 
168 AfCFTA, ZERO DRAFT Protocol on Investment to the Agreement Establishing the African Continental Free Trade Area, (2021) 
https://www.tralac.org/documents/resources/cfta/4613-protocol-on-investment-to-the-agreement-establishing-the-afcfta-zero-draft-
november-2021/file.html
=== PAGE 123 ===
 
121 
 
 
● Development-related issues (Chapter 3)  
● Investor obligations (Chapter 4)  
● Institutional arrangements (Chapter 5)  
 
FGS approach on investment  
Somalia passed a Foreign Investment Law (FIL) in 2015, that has now been implemented, on the 
protection and promotion of foreign investments.169 Under the law, priority is given to foreign 
investments in the areas of agriculture, livestock, fishing, mineral resources, and industrial activities.170 
The FIL guarantees:171 
● Foreign investors equal treatment to domestic investors 
● Fair compensation in the event of expropriation, international arbitration of disputes between 
the investors and the FGS  
● Right to remit profits and access foreign exchange  
● Investment and tax incentives for foreign investors 
 
The FIL established the Foreign Investment Board (FIB) as the highest investment policy making body in 
the country. Article 6 of the FIL (2015) also established the Somalia Investment Promotion Office 
(SOMINVEST), at the Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, as a statutory body 
to promote foreign investment, provide support and aftercare services, advocate continuously for a better 
investment climate as well as rebrand Somalia positively.172 SOMINVEST provides a repository of 
investment opportunities in Somalia, including detailed information on key sectors and investment 
avenues, regulations and legislation, to facilitate and boost FDI inflows.  
 
Somalia’s National Investment Policy and National Investment Promotion Strategy (NIPS) are also 
currently being drafted/finalised and expected to be implemented within the next 12 months. Specific 
sectors of emphasis are agriculture, livestock, fisheries, the industrial sector (value addition), 
telecommunications, and financial services. Within Africa, Somalia currently has one BIT with Egypt 
(1982). It has also signed up to the COMESA Investment Agreement (2007) and the COMESA-US TIFA 
(2001) (treaties with investment provisions).173 
 
With the Protocol finalised, Somalia will have to align/harmonise its FIL/investment code – and 
overarching investment framework – with the AfCFTA Investment Protocol. In addition, should the FGS  
complete the ratification of the EAC, it may benefit from adoption of the EAC investment code. This 
currently guides investments within the customs union and is also harmonised with the COMESA 
investment code under the TFTA.  
 
Private sector perceptions on investment  
An enhanced framework for intra-African investment – through the protocol – will be key to driving the 
expansion of Somali businesses in new and existing African markets. It follows that 94% of the firms 
 
169 https://sominvest.gov.so/why-invest/ 
170 US Department of State, 2020 Investment Climate Statements: Somalia https://www.state.gov/reports/2020-investment-climate-
statements/somalia/#:~:text=The%20country%20passed%20an%20Investment,advantages%20and%20guarantees%20against%20expropriation
s. 
171 https://sominvest.gov.so/why-invest/ 
172 Ibid 
173 https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/international-investment-agreements/countries/194/somalia
=== PAGE 124 ===
 
122 
 
 
surveyed (in Somalia and the Somali diaspora) consider the investment protocol as important, with 69% 
indicating its extreme importance, and 25% viewing it as important (see figure 38). It may be expected for 
the number of firms who consider it extremely important to be even higher. This presents opportunities 
for further communications on the protocol and the expected improved investment opportunities for the 
development of Somali businesses under the AfCFTA.   
 
Figure 33: Private sector perceived importance of Investment Protocol  
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
 
Table 24 below outlines the emerging issues – constraint and opportunities – proposed policy actions, 
outputs, and outcomes that have emerged from an assessment of Somalia’s readiness for effective 
participation on the ongoing Investment Protocol negotiations. 
 
 
Table 25: Table 26: Investment Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Issue identified 
Proposed policy 
action 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Constraints 
FIL is established (legal 
framework) and 
investment policy & 
strategies are under 
development, but no 
clear roadmap on how 
these will be aligned to 
the AfCFTA protocol on 
investment 
Develop an AfCFTA 
investment protocol 
negotiating position 
paper focused on 
intra-African FDI 
opportunities  
AfCFTA 
investment 
protocol 
position 
paper  
Harmonising 
Somalia’s 
investment regime 
with the 
continental regime  
SOMINVEST  
Internal – 
SOMINVE
ST budget
=== PAGE 125 ===
 
123 
 
 
No current specific or 
articulated strategy to 
attract Somali diaspora 
in Africa to invest 
- Ensure that 
Somalia’s National 
Diaspora Policy 
(SNDP-22) includes 
a chapter on 
attracting 
investment form its 
diaspora in Africa 
for strategy 
development  
- Fastrack 
development of 
Somalia Diaspora 
Investment Policy  
Africa 
diaspora 
investment 
strategy 
Increased 
investment from 
Somalia’s African 
diaspora  
SOMINVEST 
working with 
Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs & 
International 
Cooperation and 
Ministry of 
Planning & 
International 
Cooperation 
Internal – 
FGS 
budget  
Awareness of AfCFTA 
investment protocol 
across FGS  
MOCI to organise 
workshops for 
stakeholders across 
and outside 
government to 
validate its 
investment 
negotiating paper   
Validated 
negotiating 
paper  
Unified position 
across public and 
private sector on 
AfCFTA investment 
policy 
MoCI working 
with SOMINVEST  
Internal – 
FGS 
budget 
Opportunities 
Implementation of the 
AfCFTA Investment 
protocol  
Identify investment 
priority areas of 
alignment between 
Somalia’s investment 
frameworks and what 
is being proposed 
under the AfCFTA  
Strategy 
articulating 
Somalia’s 
AfCFTA intra-
African 
investment 
priorities  
Effective 
implementation of 
AfCFTA investment 
protocol 
MoCI working 
with SOMINVEST 
participation 
Internal – 
FGS 
budget  
 
Competition Protocol  
Deeper integration in Africa, achieved by reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers, enables firms to adopt 
strategies and engage in business that transcend national borders. Cross-border business linkages are 
also the foundation for regional value chain development. With these developments, comes the need to 
adopt regional and even continental market governance approaches to ensure that restrictive or anti-
competitive practices that have cross-border effects do not erode these benefits. Competition law is an 
essential component of market and, overall economic governance. Its aim is to promote competition, to 
enhance market outcomes for consumers and firms. 
 
Competition in the AfCFTA 
Article 4c of the AfCFTA also outlines the commitment to cooperate on competition policy. The Protocol 
on Competition is important to ensure that the AfCFTA’s liberalisation and integration benefits are not 
negated. One of the general objectives of the AfCFTA174 is to enhance the competitiveness of the 
economies of Member States within the continent and the global market. Indeed, the Protocol on Trade 
in Services contains provisions relating to monopolies and anti-competitive business practices175. 
 
 
174 Ibid  
175 Articles 11 and 12, Protocol on Trade in Services
=== PAGE 126 ===
 
124 
 
 
Competition policy in Africa is developing rapidly, and Member States will have extensive materials to 
draw on, since many African countries have introduced or are in the process of introducing competition 
legislation. Some African countries, such as South Africa and Kenya, have a well-developed competition 
law and active enforcement, and South Africa, having had competition legislation for some twenty years, 
also has an extensive body of case law176. The signing of the AfCFTA treaty appears to have galvanised 
Ghana, for one, to progress its competition legislation its accompanying policy were set to be urgently 
considered by the Ghanaian Cabinet177. 
 
In negotiating the Competition Policy Protocol, State and Non-Sate Parties will also be able to draw on 
the experience of regional economic communities. COMESA’s Competition Commission has been in 
operation for approximately six years. While their focus began with merger control, they have since 
moved to considering anti-competitive practices within and affecting the COMESA Common Investment 
Area. The interplay between national and regional bodies, for example between Kenya and COMESA in 
relation to competition jurisdiction, has caused some confusion and concern in the past. It is to be hoped 
that the AfCFTA will provide a continental framework for addressing this multi layered landscape. The 
negotiations on the competition protocol have been completed.178  
 
FGS approach on competition  
Currently there is no national competition anti-trust laws in Somalia.179 It is necessary for Somalia begin 
to establish a legal and regulatory framework, particularly as competition in the region identifies, and will 
intensify further.  
 
However, as a member of COMESA, Somalia has – by default – signed up to COMESA’s framework for 
competition – the COMESA Competition Regulations of 2004, with a corresponding COMESA Competition 
Commission operationalised in 2013.180 The core mandate of the Commission is to is to enforce the 
provisions of the Regulations with regard to trade between Member States and promote competition 
within COMESA through monitoring and investigating anti-competitive practices of undertakings of cross-
border transactions in the common market, and mediating disputes between Member States concerning 
anti-competitive conduct.181 The COMESA competition framework is one of the building blocks for the 
framework being negotiated at the AfCFTA level. 
 
Private sector perceptions on competition 
The overwhelming majority (90%) of surveyed Somali businesses – in Somalia and the diaspora – view 
the competition protocol as important, with 71% considering it extremely important (see figure 39). The 
survey results suggest Somali firms are attuned to the importance of issues of competition in the 
continental market, and that may be addressed through the protocol.  
 
 
176 Hogan Lovells (2019) Report on the African Continental Free Trade Agreement 2019 - Implications for the continent 
177 Ibid  
178 https://au-afcfta.org/trade-areas/competition-policy/ 
179 https://www.state.gov/reports/2020-investment-climate-statements/somalia/ 
180 https://www.comesacompetition.org/background/ 
181 Ibid.
=== PAGE 127 ===
 
125 
 
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
 
Table 25 below outlines the emerging issues – constraints and opportunities – proposed policy actions, 
outputs, and outcomes regarding the development of competition legislative and regulatory frameworks 
in Somalia and active implementation of the Competition Protocol.  
 
Table 27: Competition Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Issue identified 
Proposed policy action 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Constraints 
No competition 
law and related 
regulatory 
framework 
Develop competition 
legislation & regulation  
Law and 
regulations 
developed  
More stable and 
predictable 
competitive 
environment 
MoCI working 
with World Bank  
External – World 
Bank & IFC  
Awareness of 
AfCFTA 
competition 
protocol across 
FGS  
MoCI organise 
workshops for 
stakeholders across 
and outside 
government to 
validate its 
competition 
negotiating paper   
Validated 
negotiating paper  
Unified position 
across public 
and private 
sector on 
AfCFTA 
competition 
policy 
MoCI  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
Opportunities 
Implementatio
n of AfCFTA 
competition 
policy protocol  
- Identify competition 
priority areas of 
alignment between 
Somalia’s 
competition 
priorities and what 
is being proposed 
under the AfCFTA  
- Strategy 
articulating 
Somalia’s 
AfCFTA 
competition 
priorities  
- Effective 
implantation 
of AfCFTA 
competition 
policy 
protocol 
MoCI working 
with private 
sector  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 34: Private sector perceived 
importance of Competition Protocol
=== PAGE 128 ===
 
126 
 
 
 
Digital Trade Protocol 
Global trade in goods and services is rapidly moving to online platforms. The largest retailers and 
shopping platforms (Amazon, Ebay, Alibaba, Netflix, Pinduoduo, etc) are all online and are rapidly 
changing the way we consume and pay for our consumption. International trade and its logistics have also 
been transformed, and this is bound to continue at a very rapid pace. Consequently, international trade 
agreements and RECs worldwide are scrambling to adjust to this new reality and how best to harness and 
promote the growth of digital trade.   
 
Digital trade in the AfCFTA 
The AU recognised the importance of digital trade as critical to boosting intra-African trade and in 2020 
approved the development of a digital trade Protocol, now named the Digital Trade Protocol. In May 
2021, the Council of Ministers established the Committee – consisting of all State Parties – on Digital Trade 
to coordinate and facilitate the upcoming negotiations of the Protocol.182 This presents a unique 
opportunity for African countries to collectively established common positions on digital trade issues, 
harmonise digital economy regulations and leverage the benefits of digital trade.  
 
At continental level, the digital trade agenda is captured in the African Union Convention on 
Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection (2014) and the African Union Digital Transformation 
Strategy (2020-2030). The Convention sets out standards, principles, and actions to be taken by AU 
member States in the areas of digital trade, electronic contracts, personal data protection, electronic 
advertising, and security of electronic transactions. However, the Convention is not immediately binding- 
it requires ratification by fifteen countries to become a binding and actionable instrument183. As of June 
2020, there were five ratifications184. The African Union Digital Transformation Strategy (2020-2030) 
presents policy objectives related to digital trade including;  
● the creation of a continental digital single market aligned with the AfCFTA; the emergence of an 
enabling regulatory framework for digital trade at continental level;  
● the creation of a single African payments area; and solutions to challenges such as parcel delivery 
and payments.  
The African Union Digital Transformation Strategy is to be actualised by implementing strategies at 
national level. 
 
Why digital trade is important  
The case for digital trade is also linked to the infrastructure constraints that continue to hamper intra 
African trade and connectivity. Travelling by air between many African countries requires a transit in 
Europe; the long distances involved makes inter sub-regional road transport impossible; and there are 
very few cross-border railway links, such as are common in Europe. Digital trade provides platform for 
maximising the domestic and regional African markets utilising the existing transport links and 
connections.  
 
 
182 https://au-afcfta.org/trade-areas/digital-trade/ 
183 https://www.tralac.org/blog/article/14692-an-agenda-for-the-afcfta-protocol-on-e-commerce.html 
184 Ibid
=== PAGE 129 ===
 
127 
 
 
Africa’s growing and youthful population, middle class and mobile phone penetration rates are strong 
indicators of the potential for Digital trade. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD); Business-to- Consumer (B2C) e-commerce index for 2018, indicates that Africa’s digital trade 
market was worth approximately $5.7 billion in 2017, representing less than 0.5% of the region’s entire 
gross domestic product (GDP) and far below the global average which is more than 4%. McKinsey Global 
estimates that the value of e-commerce operations in Africa could reach $75 billion by 2025185. The 
immense growth in the mobile market and the expansion of the middle class signifies that Africa’s e-
commerce market has promising prospects, even though many challenges still constrain the region’s e-
commerce market from fully burgeoning. 
 
Africa’s e-commerce market could be worth more if more than half of the region’s population adopt 
online shopping. Currently, the prevalence of cybercrime in Africa has discouraged a large proportion of 
the population, specifically internet users from shopping online. Most internet users do not trust 
transactions on online shopping platforms; this situation partly accounts for the low patronage of online 
shopping platforms. 
 
E-commerce provides the opportunity to develop domestic and regional value chains – the significant 
improvements in national and regional infrastructure have created conditions for increased cross border 
trade. As such, ecommerce has the potential of helping Africa and the EAC region finally address the holy 
grail on how to build and develop sustainable regional value chains. The AfCFTA goals of harmonizing 
trade frameworks across the continent is an important catalyst for the emergence of these regional and 
continental value chains.  
 
Digitizing other sectors of the economy is critical - Several sectors such as agriculture, health, transport, 
and energy are ready to benefit from digitalization. Combining digitalization in non-financial industries 
with financial infrastructure such as mobile money will reach businesses and individuals which otherwise 
couldn’t be reached. The overall result contributes to the economic empowerment of individuals, 
communities, and businesses. 
 
Coordination of trade infrastructure - Aligning the development of infrastructure in every African country 
with the strategic framework of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), countries in Africa will 
benefit from intra-African trade that will be facilitated by e-commerce. Providing appropriate logistics and 
integrating e-commerce markets in Africa will increase the value of the region’s e-commerce market. 
 
FGS on digital trade & its importance to Somalia 
Under the Ministry of Communication & Technology (MOCT), the FGS perceives digital trade as a key 
opportunity growth and stability of Somalia, especially in the context of the regional market. There is 
current no digital trade policy, strategy, or legislative framework, but they are under development. Here, 
the EAC provides examples of what types of policies, strategies and legislation may be adapted for the 
Somali context.  
 
With the strength of the entrepreneurial and dynamic private sector in Somalia, there has been a 
substantial rise in the number of e-commerce platforms operational in the country. Soomar – a digital 
shopping site – provides a key example of Somalia’s first and largest e-commerce platform. Much of the 
diaspora already doing business with the African market also operate in the e-commerce space.  
 
185 McKinsey & Company (2019) How e-commerce supports African business growth
=== PAGE 130 ===
 
128 
 
 
 
There is huge potential for e-commerce to accelerate the development of Somali businesses in the 
African market, providing an easier entry point though increased efficiency and reduced costs of 
operation. It also allows businesses to participate in new activities, such as data and records processing, 
customer service and call centers, and software application development. More importantly it provides 
an opportunity to participate in trade without having significant upfront costs (rent, and other locational 
costs). As such, the digitisation of trade payment systems that drive online local, regional, and 
international trade is a key priority for MOCT.  
Private sector perceptions on digital trade 
The results of the survey also indicate the importance and growth of digital trade, across both Somali 
and diaspora businesses. Firms were asked whether they viewed the digital trade protocol as important 
in enhancing market access for their products. 92% indicated its importance, with the majority (63%) 
considering it as extremely important, and 29% as important (see figure 40). This calls for high private 
sector engagement on upcoming negotiations.  
 
Source: Somali Private sector Perceptions Survey - October 2022 – Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
Table 26 below outlines the emerging issues – constraints and opportunities – proposed policy actions, 
outputs, and outcomes regarding the development digital trade positioning in Somalia and active 
engagement on the Digital Trade Protocol.  
 
Table 28: Digital Trade Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Issue identified 
Proposed policy action 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Constraints 
There is no e-
commerce 
policy, strategy, 
Develop an AfCFTA 
digital trade protocol 
negotiating position 
AfCFTA digital 
trade protocol 
position paper  
Harmonising 
Somalia’s digital 
trade regime 
MoCT working 
with MoCI  
External – 
UNCTAD & 
WTO  
Figure  SEQ Figure \* ARABIC 35: Private sector perceived 
importance of digital trade protocol
=== PAGE 131 ===
 
129 
 
 
and law but they 
are currently 
being drafted  
paper focused on 
digital trade 
opportunities in Africa 
with the 
continental 
regime  
Awareness of 
AfCFTA digital 
trade protocol 
across FGS  
MOCI & MOCT to 
organise workshops for 
stakeholders across and 
outside government to 
validate its competition 
negotiating paper   
Validated 
negotiating 
paper  
Unified position 
across public 
and private 
sector on 
AfCFTA digital 
trade policy 
MoCT and MoCI 
working with 
Somalia Chamber 
of Commerce  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
Opportunities 
Ongoing AfCFTA 
digital trade 
policy 
negotiations 
that Somalia can 
influence 
Identify competition 
priority areas of 
alignment between 
Somalia’s digital trade 
priorities and what is 
being proposed under 
the AfCFTA  
Document 
articulating 
Somalia’s 
AfCFTA digital 
trade priorities 
and negotiating 
position  
-  
Effective 
participation in 
AfCFTA digital 
policy 
negotiations 
MoCI working 
with private 
sector  
Internal – FGS 
budget  
 
 
Women and Youth in Trade Protocol  
Supporting women and young Africans in trade is essential in addressing systemic and practical trade-
related issues and challenges in the context of informal and formal trade in Africa.186 The participation 
of women and youth is often not carefully considered when trade agreements are negotiated and 
implemented, but a concentred continental approach, with appropriate legal arrangements, is necessary 
to remove the specific constraints faced by women and youth traders. This is particularly in relation to the 
participation of women in ICBT. Studies indicate that women dominate ICBT and face significant 
difficulties, including harassment and access to finance.  
 
Women and Youth in Trade in the AfCFTA 
The AU has now approved the development of a specific Protocol on Women and Youth in Trade, 
recognising the importance of such an instrument. The protocol is a much-needed instrument following 
the AU’s commitment to “broaden inclusiveness in the operation of the AfCFTA through interventions 
that support young Africans, women, and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) as well as integrating 
informal cross-border traders into the formal economy by implementing the simplified trade regime”. 187 
As such, the Protocol is expected to address the specific constraints and barriers women and youth face 
when trading on the continent by creating an environment that allows women and youth to utilise the 
AfCFTA by accessing wider markets, improving their competitiveness, and participating in regional value 
chains.188 
 
The AfCFTA Secretariat is now undertaking is undertaking preparatory work towards the negotiations 
and development of the AfCFTA Protocol on Women and Youth in Trade.189 As of May 2022, 
consultations have been held in 26 countries and additional consultations are ongoing.190 These 
consultations provide women and youth in trade a platform to express their opinion, voice their concerns 
 
186 https://www.tralac.org/blog/article/15667-women-in-trade-in-the-afcfta-what-the-protocol-provide.html 
187 https://au-afcfta.org/trade-areas/women-in-trade/ 
188 Ibid.  
189 Ibid.  
190 Ibid.
=== PAGE 132 ===
 
130 
 
 
and needs, and thereby actively participating in the development of the Protocol on Women and Youth 
in Trade.191  
 
FGS on Women and Youth in Trade 
Somalia has a young population, with over 75% below the age of 35. The unemployment rate among 
Somalia’s youth is very high. Women face additional – and significant – challenges in accessing 
employment, and they remain dominant in ICBT. Currently, there in an insufficient evidence base to 
address these issues, with very limited studies on the needs of Somalia’s women and youth.  
 
Somalia has developed a National Youth Policy (NYP), with a key priority area on youth employment. 
However, there is no specific policy/strategy framework to address the participation of women and 
youth in trade in Somalia. This would be developed with the support of the Ministry of Women and 
Human Rights and the Ministry of Youth and Sports, but both entities are yet to be engaged on the AfCFTA 
specifically. There is an understanding, particularly from the Ministry of Youth and Sports, that there is a 
need for collaboration with MOCI to understand and develop Somalia’s positioning on the Protocol. As 
such, consultations with these ministries on their involvement in the Protocol negotiation process is a key 
priority.  
 
Table 27 below outlines the emerging issues – constraints and opportunities – proposed policy actions, 
outputs, and outcomes regarding the development of Somalia’s positioning on Women and Youth in trade 
and ability to actively engage on the Protocol.  
 
Table 29: Women & Youth in Trade Protocol Issues Identified, Proposed Policy Actions, Outputs & Outcomes 
Constraints  
Proposed policy 
intervention 
Output  
Outcome  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Constraints 
 
 
No specific or 
articulated 
policy & strategy 
to address 
participation of 
women and 
youth in trade 
(formal & ICBT) 
- Develop an AfCFTA 
women and youth in 
trade protocol 
position paper 
focused on 
opportunities to 
improve the 
participation of 
women and youth in 
trade in Africa (formal 
& ICBT)  
- AfCFTA 
women and 
youth in 
trade 
consultation 
position 
paper  
- Increased 
participation 
of Somali 
women and 
youth trading 
with the 
continent  
MoCI working 
with Ministry of 
Women & Human 
Rights and 
Ministry of Youth 
& Sports 
External – 
UNECA, UN 
Women, Trade 
Mark Africa, 
SIDA, 
MaterCard 
Foundation 
Opportunities 
Ongoing AfCFTA 
digital trade 
policy 
consultations 
that Somalia can 
participate in 
- Identify women and 
youth in trade priority 
areas of alignment 
between Somalia’s 
priorities and what is 
being proposed under 
the AfCFTA  
- Document 
articulating 
Somalia’s 
AfCFTA 
women and 
youth in 
trade 
priorities  
- Effective 
participation 
in AfCFTA 
women and 
youth in trade 
consultations 
MoCI working 
with Ministry of 
Women & Human 
Rights and 
Ministry of Youth 
& Sports 
External – 
UNECA, UN 
Women, Trade 
Mark Africa, 
SIDA, 
MaterCard 
Foundation 
 
 
 
191 Ibid.
=== PAGE 133 ===
 
131 
 
 
Pillar 9: Enhancing trade opportunities   
This pillar covers the analysis of the potential new areas where Somalia can enhance its trade and market 
access opportunities. The analysis covers the blue economy, cross border trade, and industrialisation. 
Policy and strategic interventions in these areas will allow Somalia to address its unsustainable trade 
deficit while enhancing its value addition industrial capacity and export potential arising from the 
implementation of the AfCFTA. 
The Blue Economy  
The World Bank defines the blue economy as the “sustainable use of ocean resources for economic 
growth, improved livelihoods, and jobs while preserving the health of ocean ecosystem.”192 The African 
continent is endowed with massive aquatic and marine resources including oceans, seas, rivers, and lakes 
with potential for blue economy growth. The continent has 38 coastal states and several island states such 
as Cape Verde, Sao Tomé and Principe, Mauritius, Seychelles, Madagascar and the Comoros. Collectively 
African coastal and island states encompass vast ocean territories of an estimated 13 million km². These 
water bodies and wetlands are certainly of strategic importance to the continent and provide 
opportunities for fisheries, aquaculture, shipping, coastal tourisms, offshore oil and gas energy 
mobilization and other blue economy related activities. 
 
The African Blue Economy  
The African Union Commission recognises the importance of the blue economy to the continent’s 
development and economic transformation. African blue economy sectors in 2018 generated a value of 
USD 296 billion with 49 million jobs. It is projected that by 2030, figures will be respectively USD 405 billion 
and 57 million jobs while in 2063 estimates would respectively be USD 576 billion of value created and 78 
million of jobs193. Consequently, the commission developed the Africa Blue Economy Strategy to help its 
members states develop policies and strategies that would sustainably exploit / develop their blue 
economy resources. The strategy focuses on the strategy focusses on five critical blue economy sectors, 
considered as thematic areas as follows; 
● Fisheries, aquaculture, and ecosystems conservation  
● Shipping, transportation, and trade  
● Sustainable energy, extractive minerals, gas, innovative industries  
● Environmental sustainability, climate change and coastal infrastructure 
● Governance, Institutions, and social actions 
 
The AfCFTA and the Blue Economy  
Implementation of the AfCFTA is expected to help African countries sustainably exploit their blue 
economy resources. The removal of trade and tariff barriers will improve intra African market access, 
reduce trade costs and enhance domestic and regional value-added manufacturing targeted at African 
markets. For example, investment in improving port facilities across the continent is expected to Africa 
seaport performance and competitiveness. A PricewaterhouseCoopers report estimates that a 25% 
improvement in port performance could increase GDP by 2%194. Similarly, having a merchant fleet 
provides means of transport, connectivity to global trade and livelihoods to people in the industry. Only a 
 
192 WBG (2022) Overview - Blue Economy for Resilient Africa Program: Operational Brief.  
193 AUC (2019) Africa Blue Economy Strategy  
194 PricewaterhouseCoopers, Strengthening Africa’s gateway to Trade (PWC, 2018).
=== PAGE 134 ===
 
132 
 
 
few African countries can boast of having a national fleet (such as Algeria, Egypt and Ethiopia. The 
existence of national shipping companies makes it possible to effectively transport the country’s foreign 
trade. This is one of the key constraints limiting the expansion of intra African trade.  
 
The Trade in services protocol of the AfCFTA includes negotiations on liberalisation of transport 
services. Currently, State Parties are engaged in rigorous negotiations under the Committee of Trade in 
Services of which the first round of negotiations is currently ongoing under five (5) priority sectors, 
namely, Business Services; Communication Services; Financial Services; Transport Services, and Tourism 
and Travel-related Services; with 48 initial and revised offers from both State and non-State Parties 
currently being considered and the request/offer process being at a fairly advanced stage. 
 
Blue Economy under IGAD 
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) in Eastern Africa was created in 1996 and has 
8 member states including Somalia. The IGAD Vision of the Blue Economy is an inclusive and sustainable 
Blue Economy that significantly contributes to the Horn of Africa’s transformation195. More specifically, 
the IGAD Blue Economy Strategy aims to:  
● improve the implementation of the BE in all IGAD members States; 
● contribute to the implementation of the Africa Blue Economy Strategy  
● develop strong unifying regional BE initiatives;  
● increase cooperation and regional integration by using the BE as a catalyst to stimulate a 
converging dynamic of interests and efforts. 
 
The strategy highlights a number of constraints limiting the ability of its members state to maximize the 
potential of their blue economy resources. These constraints include the following;  
● Insufficient structuring of the implementation of Blue Economy 
● Lack of knowledge of blue potential 
● Absence of accounting for Blue Economy activities and components i.e., Blue Economy 
contribution to creating added value and creating jobs. 
● Too little added value creation ¾ IGAD Member States export many raw materials (fish, minerals, 
oils, etc.), unprocessed and very little processed products. 
● Nutritional deficit - Food exports often occur at the expense of the nutritional needs of the local 
population. 
● The absence of integrated and prospective approach to marine ecosystems and spatiotemporal 
management tools 
  
Somalia’s Blue Economy Strategy  
Somalia is endowed with vast Blue Economy (BE) potential that if well managed could bring real 
economic transformation. Somalia also has the longest coastline of mainland African countries about 
3,333km coastline, with an estimated shelf area (depth 0 - 200 m) of 32,500km. The Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) of Somalia extending 200 nautical miles (NM) covers 1,05,500 km2 in the Indian Ocean 604 
fish species, 420 commercial fish species, with an annual economic value of $135m196. In addition, the 
country has three permanent rivers (Shabelle, Juba and Dhawo), four commercial ports, eleven jetty ports, 
and more sixty natural fish land sites197. 
 
195 IGAD (2020) Regional Blue Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan for 5 years (2021-2025) 
196 FGS (2022) National Blue Economy Strategy and Implementation Plan 2023-2027 (2nd draft)  
197 ibid
=== PAGE 135 ===
 
133 
 
 
 
With the support of IGAD, the FGS has developed a national blue economy strategy. With its key location 
along main international shipping routes, some 3,300 kilometres of coastline and extensive sea-based 
resources, Somalia’s maritime domain is widely considered as providing immense economic opportunities 
in the ‘Blue Economy.’ the NBES provides not only a guideline for the implementation of BE relative 
activities; but also, a governance framework and implementation plan to achieve optimal BE generated 
economies. In this regard, the strategy is intended to help in effectively translating policies into concrete 
actions. The strategy has identified the following constraints.  
● Fisheries sector constraints – the fisheries and aquatic sector is one of Somalia’s most important 
natural resources. Its sustainable exploitation is critical to inclusive and poverty alleviation 
development. There are number of constraints that limit the ability of the sector to effectively 
maximise its potential (export and value addition). These include the following. 
o Insufficient relevant policies, strategies, and regulation: resulting impediments in 
effective 19 management and sustainable use of the aquatic resources.  
o Inadequate landing facilities: resulting difficulties to offload fish and obtain supplies 
(food, fuel, ice, gears, etc.)  
o Lack of cold chain infrastructure: resulting increase of fish post-harvest losses and 
decrease opportunities to meet market demands.  
o Lack of value addition: resulting low profit and quality  
o Limited enforcement capacity and weak governance: resulting unsatisfactory use of 
resources and incorrect application of fisheries legislation and regulations. 
● Marine trade infrastructure – Somalia location offers an important gateway to eastern and 
Central Africa if its trade related infrastructure is developed. The country is therefore situated at 
the entry and departure point of one of the most principal international commercial shipping 
lanes in the world such as the Suez Canal and via the Cape, which makes the county's ports 
strategic importance. The following constraints were identified in the elaboration of the NNBES 
2023-2027.  
o Inadequate maritime infrastructure: resulting low capacity to handle the volume of 
arriving different types of vessels which need cargo, transhipment, bunkering, storage 
facilities.  
o Limited number of commercial ports to meet the demand for inter-regional trade: 
resulting loss of trade opportunities.  
o Lack of technologies and human skilled personnel: resulting negatively in handling, 
unloading, and storing goods from vessels in efficient and timely manner  
o Lack of required IT infrastructure and limited port communications: resulting weak flow 
of 
information 
and 
communication 
with 
vessels 
and 
between 
different 
units/departments in the port, impacting their chain of operations. 
● Tourism – Somalia has significant tourism potential. The long scenic coastline, rich biodiversity, 
and favourable climate make makes the country an ideal country for tourism development. The 
tourism industry of Somalia was traditionally noted for its numerous historical sites, beautiful 
beaches, mountain ranges and national parks. Unfortunately, during the civil war in the early 
1990s, the tremendous and untapped tourism potentials of the country shut down operations. To 
effectively develop its blue tourism potential, Somalia will need to address the following 
constraints.  
o Insufficient blue tourism policies, strategies and regulations: resulting delay in effective 
management of blue tourism opportunities  
o Lack of promotion and marketing for tourism potential resources: resulting tourism 
attractions not promoted, therefore number of tourists is impacted
=== PAGE 136 ===
 
134 
 
 
o Inadequate infrastructure: resulting no tourism progress 
o Security concerns that have affected both tourism investment and arrivals  
● Inland water resources - Sources of water from rivers in Somalia are mainly confined in the two 
rivers, Shebelle (2,526 km) and Juba (1,808 Km), which pass through the Southern portion of the 
country198. The two rivers remain the food basket of two million and half Somali people and water 
about other five million herds – livestock. The Somalia agriculture sector is heavily dependent on 
sustainable management of its water resources both for irrigation and human consumption. 
Constraints identified in the NBES include the following;  
o Climate volatility: resulting rising temperature and variation in precipitation patterns 
which leads to increasing frequency of droughts and water scarcity  
o Insufficient water resources policies, strategies and regulations: resulting delay in 
effective management and exploitation of aquatic resources  
o Limited regulations for private water supplies: resulting expensive water prices,  
o Water Contamination and pollution: resulting micro-biological elements and 
contamination of unprotected wells  
o Poor water quality: resulting high salinity level over the required standard for drinking 
water  
o Poor water infrastructure and management: resulting economic water scarcity which 
could affects the economic, education and health sectors 
 
● Offshore oil and gas - Somalia’s petroleum potential is vital for the country’s future socio-
economic development and hence a key to its national development plan. The sector in fact; holds 
hopes for economic diversification from the BE potential of oil and gas extractions and therefore 
more sustainable revenue streams could contribute to an inclusive economic development of the 
country. In addition to the revenue from licensing and royalties, Somalia can also potentially meet 
its fuel consumption and therefore do without imports in the future, if the necessary 
infrastructure when the is well managed and developed. Thus, the development of petroleum 
sector will likely have a positive impact on the structure of existing domestic industries and 
markets, especially energy and transport markets. Constraints identified include;  
o Insufficient legislation, policies, and regulations 
o Lack of technical and human capacity 
o International boundary disputes with neighbouring countries  
o The transition to electric cars which would reduce demand for petroleum based products  
 
Issues and policy recommendations  
Table 29 below outlines the summary of emerging issues and proposed policy actions.  
Table 29: Blue Economy Policy Actions 
Issue identified   
Proposed policy action  
Outputs  
Outcomes 
Ownership/lea
d entity  
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
National Blue Economy 
Strategy is in place but 
needs an Action plan and 
coordination forum to 
ensure 
its 
effective 
implementation  
Develop a BES action 
plan and set up an 
institutional 
coordination 
platform 
that will oversee the 
implementation 
of 
BES 
action 
plan  
BES steering 
committee  
Effective 
implmention 
and 
coordination of 
the 
BES 
strategy  
MoCI 
and 
ministry 
of 
Fisheries 
and 
Blue economy  
FGS budget  
 
198 Ibid
=== PAGE 137 ===
 
135 
 
 
reforms contained in the 
strategy  
Current 
Somalia 
port 
infrastructure 
needs 
investment to order to 
improve 
functionality 
and efficiency. The port 
at Mogadishu is rapidly 
reaching its operational 
capacity   
FGS needs to develop a 
national 
port 
development 
strategy 
that 
prioritises 
the 
investment 
required; 
investment options i.e., 
PPP etc, and operational 
models 
National Port 
development 
strategy  
Investment 
attracted 
to 
finance 
key 
port 
infrastructure  
Ministry of Ports  
FGS budget 
and AfDB 
Somalia’s shipping sector 
is underdeveloped with 
low levels of investment. 
Somalia 
had 
not 
developed 
a 
national 
shipping line that would 
enhance its access to the 
African continent and 
trade 
FGS to develop a national 
shipping 
development 
strategy that would help 
guide 
and 
incentivise 
investment in the sector  
National 
shipping 
development 
strategy  
Investment 
attracted 
to 
Somalia 
shipping sector  
Ministry of Ports 
and shipping  
FGS budget 
and AfDB 
Somalia doesn’t have a 
systematic 
record 
of 
marine 
information 
critical to guiding and 
informing 
policy 
development 
and 
reforms 
that 
would 
unlock 
its 
maritime 
resource potential  
FGS 
to 
develop 
a 
comprehensive maritime 
database that will allow 
the collection of several 
maritime indicators as 
well as a comprehensive 
resource 
base 
where 
data for both natural and 
human capital aspects 
are to be evaluated and 
quantified. 
Maritime 
database 
developed  
Improved data 
to 
support 
policy 
reform 
and 
and 
implementatio
n  
Ministry 
of 
Fisheries 
and 
Blue economy 
FGS budget 
and AfDB 
Somalia’s BE potential 
affected by insecurity 
and 
risk 
perceptions. 
Maritime border disputes 
are 
constraining 
the 
ability 
to 
exploit 
its 
maritime resources 
Improve regional peace 
and security: This will 
foster the development 
of all the Blue Economy 
sectors, including easing 
tensions 
linked 
to 
maritime boundaries. 
Resolution of 
maritime 
border 
disputes  
Sustainable 
exploitation of 
Somalia 
blue 
economy 
resources  
Ministry 
of 
Fisheries 
and 
Blue economy 
Ministry 
of 
Fisheries 
and 
Blue economy 
FGS budget 
and AfDB 
Limited value addition in 
the key blue economy 
subsectors 
specifically 
fishing. Most of Somalis 
fish exports have little or 
no value add.  
FGS to develop a value 
addition strategy that 
would guide investments 
by both the public and 
private 
sector 
to 
maximise 
the 
value 
addition capacity and 
capability in Somalia’s 
fishing sector  
Blue 
economy 
Value chain 
strategy  
Capacity 
constraints 
within the marine and 
shipping 
sectors 
undermines the ability to 
implement 
good 
governance 
FGS to seek support from 
international 
maritime 
agencies willing to help 
build the capacity of its 
blue economy ministries 
and agencies  
Capacity 
building plan  
Somalia’s 
tourism 
potential is limited by 
security concerns and the 
lack 
of 
appropriate 
infrastructure  
Developing strong inter-
sectoral 
linkages 
is 
necessary 
to 
ensure 
greater 
capture 
of 
tourists’ 
expenditures. 
This will facilitate the
=== PAGE 138 ===
 
136 
 
 
transfer 
of 
economic 
benefits from the sector 
to the local communities 
thereby contributing to 
improved livelihoods and 
poverty reduction 
 
Industrialization  
Promoting industrialisation is one of the main objectives of the AfCFTA. By facilitating intra-African trade 
and creating an integrated African market of 1.2 billion people, the AfCFTA aims to provide opportunities 
for African countries, industries, and firms to diversify, specialise and benefit from economies of scale, 
allowing them to become more productive and competitive. The commercial opportunities and 
competitive pressures unleashed by the AfCFTA should also stimulate increased domestic and foreign 
direct investment, which in turn should foster technological upgrading – an important driver of 
industrialisation199. 
 
Industrialisation in the AfCFTA 
Under the AfCFTA negotiations, there has been limited engagement on the industrialization agenda. 
There are different protocols that will help address or create the environment supportive of the 
industrialization agenda200 but at this point there is no structural engagement with industrial development 
in the AfCFTA. The AUC developed the Plan of Action for the Accelerated Industrial Development for Africa 
(AIDA) with the specific goal of clearly articulating the role of industrialization in Africa’s development and 
the achievement of AUs Agenda 2063201.  
 
The interplay between regional (or continental) integration and national industrial policies is not always 
harmonious202. Many African countries already have industrial policies, and the policy tools they use often 
conflict with the goals of regional trade integration. The AfCFTA should include industrial strategic 
framework that aims to develop coherent and coordinated industrial policies at the regional and national 
level e.g., incentives for EPZs SEZs and Industrial parks that reduces the race to the bottom. 
To maximise gains from the AfCFTA, they should also complement it with efforts to improve trade-
related infrastructure and address non-tariff barriers to intra-African trade, including inefficient customs 
practices. Analysis from the International Monetary Fund203 suggests that addressing infrastructure needs 
and non-tariff barriers could have a much bigger impact on intra-African trade than tariff liberalisation 
under the AfCFTA. 
Somalia industrialisation perspective  
Over the thirty years of civil war Somalia’s industrial sector has been destroyed and starved of 
investment. As a result, Somalia has one of the largest trade defects in Africa - Somalia recorded a trade 
deficit of 3147.63 USD Million in 2021. Somalia’s systemic trade deficit is the result of the country’s 
dependency on imports of food, fuel, construction materials and manufactured goods. Main exports are: 
livestock, bananas, skins, fish, charcoal and scrap metal. Somalia main trading partners are the United 
Arab Emirates, Yemen, and Oman. 
 
199 https://ecdpm.org/talking-points/african-continental-free-trade-area-afcfta-politics-industrialisation/ 
200 Trade in Goods, Trade in Services, Intellectual Property Rights, Competition, Investment 
201 https://au.int/en/ti/aida/about 
202 https://ecdpm.org/talking-points/african-continental-free-trade-area-afcfta-politics-industrialisation/ 
203 IMF 2019 Regional economic outlook. Sub-Saharan Africa: recovery amid elevated uncertainty.
=== PAGE 139 ===
 
137 
 
 
 
Manufacturing sector is one of the crucial sectors, the Federal Government of Somalia is promoting to 
realize significant export volumes, create more jobs and make the concept of ‘Made in Somalia’ a reality. 
Locally manufactured goods should be competitive and offer additional value to increase local 
consumption. To realise this vision, the FGS through the MoCI has develop a national industrialisation 
policy that aims to clearly articulate how Somalia will revamp its industrial sector to help address its 
unsustainable trade deficit.  
 
The key pillars of the Industrial development policy are (i) the promotion of local production and (ii) 
expansion of exports of value-added goods204. The policy aims to boost economic growth; enhance 
productivity; increase employment; and improve livelihoods of all Somalians. The objectives of the policy 
are overall very inwards looking however, there is a recognition that developing domestic industrial 
capacity will in the long run enhance Somalia’s capacity to export. Other objectives include;  
● Protection of local products from unchecked imports that exacerbate the trade deficit. 
● Promoting product-based investment that expands exports and creates employment 
opportunities. 
● Protecting nascent and small-scale industries that are strategic to livelihoods and security. 
● Creating a resilient economy through diversifies industrial production.  
● Regulatory reforms that address constraints in local production, manufacturing, investment, 
exports, standards, and marketing both domestic and international.  
 
Issues and policy actions 
For Somalia to benefit from the AfCFTA, it would need to ensure that the implementation of its industrial 
policy is aligned with the market access and trade facilitation reforms currently being introduced in the 
AfCFTA. Table 14 below outlines the emerging issues and proposed policy actions that were discussed 
with various stakeholders in the process of elaborating this strategy. The list policy actions outlined below 
are in addition to those outlined the Somalia Industrial Development Policy 2020 (see table 30).  
Table 30: Industrialisation Policy Actions 
Issue identified   
Proposed 
policy 
action  
Outputs  
Outcomes 
Ownership/lea
d entity  
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
Industrial policy is in 
place, however, there 
is no strategy to guide 
implementation  
MoCI 
develop 
an 
industrialisation 
strategy 
that 
operationalises 
the 
recently 
developed 
industrial policy 
Industrial 
strategy  
Increased 
investment
s 
in 
the 
industrial 
sector  
Increased 
industrial 
output 
MoCI  
FGS budget 
and UNIDO 
The industrial policy 
alluded to promoting 
Made 
in 
Somalia 
however, there is no 
specific 
strategy 
on 
how this objective will 
be achieved 
MoCI to develop a 
domestic 
market 
recapture 
strategy 
that clearly outlines 
how the Made in 
Somalia 
will 
be 
operationalised  
Made 
in 
Somalia 
strategy  
Reduction 
in the trade 
deficit 
 
Increased 
no of goods 
MoCI 
and 
Private sector  
FGS budget 
and UNIDO 
 
204 FGS (2020) Somalia Industrial Development Policy 2020
=== PAGE 140 ===
 
138 
 
 
produced in 
Somalia  
No local content policy 
to drive local value 
addition   
Develop 
a 
national 
local content strategy 
that will develop an 
incentive structure for 
local value addition 
Local 
content 
strategy  
Increased % 
of 
local 
content in 
products 
made 
in 
Somalia  
MoCI  
FGS budget 
and UNIDO 
SEZ Act is in place but 
it’s not clear whether 
there is a policy of 
strategy to guide and 
drive implementation. 
Develop SEZ Policy and 
Strategy  
SEZ policy 
and 
strategy 
developed  
Increased 
value of FDI 
in Somalia 
SEZs 
MoCI 
and 
Sominvest 
FGS budget 
and UNIDO 
No diagnostic of which 
sectors and product 
lines will be prioritised 
in 
the 
domestic 
industrial promotion  
Undertake a study to 
inform 
the 
prioritisation 
of 
sectors and product 
lines that would form 
the 
basis 
for 
the 
investor attraction  
Domestic 
industrial 
promotion 
strategy  
Increased 
number of 
products 
produced in 
Somalia’s 
industries  
MoCI 
FGS budget 
and UNIDO 
 
Informal Cross border trade  
The AfCFTA is expected to provide an economic boost of US$3.4 trillion to the continent, which is even 
more critical given the socioeconomic impact COVID-19 is having across Africa. Nevertheless, it will only 
live up to its potential if the benefits from intracontinental trade are inclusive for all Africans. While the 
AfCFTA promises to boost intra-Africa trade as whole, little is said on the impact it will have on Informal 
Cross Border Trade (ICBT)205 which is pre-dominantly led by women206. ICBT is defined as the small-scale 
cross-border trade of legitimate subsistence goods and services, which intentionally or unintentionally 
evades taxation and other procedures set by governments, and often goes unrecorded into official 
national statistics. 
 
Intra African trade is normally listed at 15-16% well below that of Europe (73%) and Asia (52%). These 
numbers with respect to Africa maybe undercounted given the paucity of data on ICBT. ICBT’s contribution 
to total intra-African trade varies significantly across the region, but is particularly prevalent in Western 
and Eastern Africa, where ICBT accounts for as much as 42% and 80%, respectively, of total trade between 
some countries207. The magnitude of these estimates implies that ICBT is a critical feature of Africa’s trade 
landscape that has neither been considered in balance of payment statistics nor drawn upon to inform 
the design of trade and industrial policies208. 
ICBT is typified by its small-scale and provides opportunities to poorer communities that formal trade 
in some cases might not offer. These informal traders are often poor women and men, with no land title. 
If not the producers themselves, they link farmers to markets in the border towns, who might not have 
had the same opportunity through formal channels.  
 
205 Globally, ICBT is defined as trade between neighboring countries conducted by vulnerable, small, unregistered traders. 
206 https://www.africaportal.org/features/women-without-borders-what-the-afcfta-can-do-for-botswanas-informal-cross-border-traders/ 
207 Afriexim bank (2020) - African Trade Report 2020 Informal Cross-Border Trade in Africa in the Context of the AfCFTA 
208 ibid
=== PAGE 141 ===
 
139 
 
 
ICBT, mainly informal, plays an important role in poverty reduction as it provides viable trading 
opportunities for many of the poorest, particularly women, who are the most active traders along intra-
African borders. Informal trade enables individuals to participate in income generating activities, with low 
start-up capital. The start-up capital is mostly taken from household resources, where loans from 
associations, vendors and banks are relatively limited209.  
ICBT activity has a multiplier impact on stakeholders through increased direct income and organisation 
(especially in cooperatives), indirect income (through suppliers and service providers within the value 
chain) and induced economic income (through the higher circulation of wealth through the economy, 
from one producer to a consumer and so on). 
● Direct employment of traders – this is intensified where income is invested in assets such as land, 
education, and health.  
● There is an indirect impact on stakeholders that are part of the ICBT ‘value chain’, felt intensely in 
local districts to the borders. 
● ICBT also has an induced impact via a multiplier on economic activity with expenditure. 
 
ICBT in the AfCFTA 
By reducing tariffs, AfCFTA makes it more affordable for informal traders to operate through formal 
channels, which offer more protection. This can be further enhanced by simplified trading regimes for 
small traders, such as the Simplified Trade Regime in the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(COMESA), which provides a simplified clearing procedure alongside reduced import duties that provide 
help to small-scale traders.  
The STR targets specifically small traders who regularly transact in low-value consignments and who 
are exempted from customs duties and other related taxes. The STR is meant to benefit the small-scale 
cross-border traders in employment creation, food security and promotion of cross-pollination of goods 
within the regions. The STR consist more generally of four main instruments, namely: a simplified customs 
document, a simplified certificate of origin, a common list of products and a threshold for the value of the 
consignment. 
The AfCFTA does not include an STR that would support ICBT and women who dominate this type of 
trade. Nevertheless, STRs have been developed for COMESA and EAC. Funding from the AfDB has 
supported the development of TFTA STR which means the harmonisation of the EAC, COMESA and SADC 
regimes. These frameworks provide a useful starting point for the development of an AFCFTA STR.  
ICBT in IGAD 
In 2022, IGAD of which Somalia is a member has outlined its new Regional Trade Policy (2022-2026)210. 
The IGAD Regional Trade Policy’s vision is to foster market-driven, development-oriented, and sustainable 
trade in the IGAD region, capable of catalysing expanded economic growth, reducing poverty, ensuring 
food security, and attaining improved living standards in the region. The overarching objective of the 
policy is to promote sustainable growth and development of the IGAD Member States by raising the 
standard of living of their people through closer economic integration. Specifically, the trade policy aims 
to;  
 
209 Dr Nene Morisho Mwanabiningo (International Alert), Deriving Maximum Benefit from Small-Scale Cross Border Trade Between DRC and 
Rwanda, September 2015 
210 IGAD (2022) IGAD Regional Trade Policy 2022-2026
=== PAGE 142 ===
 
140 
 
 
● create an open and unified regional economic space to boost intra-IGAD trade by creating the 
necessary enabling environment and removing obstacles for trade in goods and services;  
● create coherence among national trade policies of IGAD Member States;  
● help IGAD Member States implement their obligations arising from regional trade agreements, in 
particular the AfCFTA; and to  
● promote creation of an enabling environment for foreign and domestic investment. 
 
IGAD has also developed a framework to guide members states in creating and supporting inclusive and 
safe ICBT211. The core objectives of the policy framework are to;   
● Ensure a coherent understanding of ICBT contributions to livelihoods and economic well-being of 
borderland communities; 
● Enhance greater ICBT-CBSG policy convergence and harmonization between IGAD member 
states; 
● Strengthen border security systems and supporting trade facilitation at border crossing points 
(BCPs); 
● Promote the participation of borderland communities in policy consultations to ensure that Cross-
border trade and security-related decisions are enriched, and borderland communities’ interests 
and concerns promoted; and 
● Ensure availability and access to consistent, timely and reliable data and analysis on cross-border 
economic exchanges and ICBT. 
The ICBT policy framework is aligned with important gains made in formulation and harmonization of 
trade policies at regional and continental levels through the Common Market for East and Southern 
Africa (COMESA) as well as African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). 
 
Table 31: ICBT Policy Actions 
Issue identified   
Proposed policy action  
Outputs  
Outcomes  
Ownership/lea
d entity  
Proposed 
source of 
funding 
Somalia does not 
have an ICBT policy 
or strategy and yet 
a 
significant 
amount of trade 
takes place at this 
informal level  
MoCI to develop ICBT 
policy and strategy  
ICBT policy and 
strategy 
developed  
CBT 
quantified  
MoCI & Somalia 
Customs 
and 
revenue 
department  
FGS 
and 
FCDO  
There is very little 
data 
on 
cross 
border trade which 
limits 
the 
development 
of 
effective 
policies 
to guide the trade 
and maximise the 
benefits for all  
MoCI 
to 
work 
with 
relevant federal states 
and FGS ministries and 
agencies to agree a 
farmework for collecting 
and reporting ICBT data 
 
Strengthen/establish 
ICBT data collection and 
analytical capacities at 
key border points to 
gauge ICBTs contribution 
to the economy. 
ICBT 
data 
collection 
framework  
ICBT data 
available 
for all who 
need it  
MoCI 
and 
Federal states  
FGS 
and 
FCDO 
 
211 IGAD (2018) Policy Framework on the nexus between Informal Cross-Border Trade & Cross-Border Security Governance
=== PAGE 143 ===
 
141 
 
 
It’s not clear that 
any 
simplified 
trade regime is in 
operation at the 
key border points 
where ICBT trade is 
taking 
place 
– 
Somalia’s borders 
with 
Kenya, 
Ethiopia 
and 
Djibouti 
MoCI to review regional 
STRs 
and 
their 
applicability 
at 
the 
relevant 
borders 
to 
facilitate trade.  
EAC and IGAD 
STR 
implementatio
n strategy  
Increased 
value 
of 
ICBT 
recorded 
at borders 
where the 
STR is in 
force 
MoCI & Somalia 
Customs 
and 
revenue 
department 
FGS 
and 
FCDO 
Women and youth 
continue to face 
challenges 
in 
trading 
across 
borders  
Prioritize a gender and 
youth-based 
approach 
to ICBT which address 
some of the pervasive 
constraints that afflict 
women 
and 
youth 
participation in trade. 
Women 
and 
youth in ICBT 
strategy 
developed  
Increased 
number of 
women 
and youth 
engaged in 
CBT 
 
MoCI 
and 
Ministries 
of 
youth 
and 
women  
FGS 
and 
Sida 
Intensification 
of 
cross border policy 
dialogue will build 
an understanding 
of 
local 
cross 
border dynamics. 
Mainstream 
ICBT 
in 
national and regional 
economic 
policy 
dialogues. 
Number 
of 
meetings held 
on 
ICBT 
facilitation  
Increased 
volume of 
ICBT 
recorded 
at 
Somalia’s 
borders  
MoCI & Somalia 
Customs 
and 
revenue 
department 
FGS 
budget 
Cross 
border 
payments systems 
remain a challenge  
The 
promotion 
of 
suitable 
financing 
solutions is of critical 
importance for informal 
and small-scale traders. 
Traders without bank 
accounts 
are 
often 
locked out of formal 
processes. 
Electronic 
payment systems for 
cross-border payments 
can cut the security risks 
for informal traders and 
represent 
an 
opportunity to formalise 
trade. 
Electronic CBT 
payments 
system 
developed  
Value 
of 
payments 
made 
using the 
digital 
payments 
system  
MoCI & Somalia 
Customs 
and 
revenue 
department 
FGS 
budget
=== PAGE 144 ===
 
142 
 
 
Cross cutting theme – Inclusion - women youth and PWD 
The participation of key segments of Africa population (women, youth and people with disabilities) is a 
prerequisite for successful and inclusive AfCFTA. The participation of these groups in trade is often not 
carefully considered when trade agreements are negotiated and implemented. Studies on ICBT indicate 
that women dominate this trade and face significant difficulties – harassment, access to finance, 
corruption etc. 
Inclusion in the AfCFTA 
● The AfCFTA agreement does not have a specific Annex on gender212, however as one of its 
general objectives, the AfCFTA commits to “promote and attain sustainable and inclusive socio-
economic development, gender equality and structural transformation of the State Parties.” Thus, 
ensuring that gender equality is promoted in all AfCFTA processes is at the heart of the agreement. 
● Article 27 (2) (d) of the AfCFTA Protocol on Trade in Services refers to improving the export 
capacity of formal and informal service suppliers, with particular attention to micro, small and 
medium-sized operators and “women and youth service suppliers”. It is important to emphasize 
that the needs, challenges, and capabilities for these groups are different and hence should be 
addressed separately. Indeed, women and men face several gender-distinct barriers that must be 
addressed in order to ensure gender-equitable outcomes in AfCFTA implementation.   
● While the AfCFTA offers a major opportunity for women, gains will not be automatic. Advancing 
women’s equal participation in the AfCFTA requires considering the implications of gender 
inequalities and removing identified inequalities and gender-based trade barriers, most often 
experienced disproportionately by women, in the design of gender-responsive AfCFTA policies 
and complementary measures. As part of this process, it will be necessary to understand how to 
leverage key provisions in the AfCFTA Agreement to ensure gender-equitable outcomes in AfCFTA 
implementation.  
● A key study by UN Women213 has identified opportunities in the AfCFTA where gender could be 
mainstreamed. The Protocol on Trade in Goods, the Protocol on Trade in Services, the Protocol 
on Rules of Origin and the Protocol on the Free Movement of People. These provisions offer a 
variety of economic opportunities to women entrepreneurs as follows; 
o AfCFTA provisions that adopt preferential trade regimes for small-scale trade, including 
its annex on customs cooperation, should include simplified measures that can 
accommodate a small volume of consignments and implement specific trade permits and 
visa regimes for small traders, as well as reduce other taxes such as the value-added tax 
and import and export taxes. 
o The AfCFTA’s provisions for tariff measures to facilitate small-scale trade are likely to 
address WICBT challenges regarding corruption. Such provisions should aim at 
progressive elimination of tariff and import duties for goods and commodities that are 
mostly traded by WICBT. This also requires an extensive common list for low-value 
exports for improved market access with specific importance to cross-border traders. 
o On gender and public procurement, the AfCFTA’s implementation should consider 
strengthening public procurement systems as a vehicle for creating wealth for growing 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) or women-owned businesses. 
 
212 It is expected that negotiations on a gender annex are expected to commence this year (2021)  
213 UN Women (2019) Opportunities for women Entrepreneurs in the Context of the African Continental Free Trade Area
=== PAGE 145 ===
 
143 
 
 
o The AfCFTA agreement is likely to foster industrialization and regional competitiveness 
through the creation of regional value chains and improved agro-processing. The success 
of such value chains will, however, depend on addressing identified key challenges to 
women’s effective participation in them. As part of this process, it will be necessary to 
understand the terms of involvement for women by conducting gender-focused sectoral 
value chain analysis to determine with accuracy where women and men are in various 
segments of the value chain.  
o AfCFTA implementation also requires strong monitoring mechanisms for systematic 
collection of gender-disaggregated data on cross-border trade flows. 
● The AfCFTA places significant emphasis on growth, industrialization, and job creation all of 
which have relevance for Africa youth. In addition, the protocol FMP and the creation of the 
single aviation market on the continent have significant resonance for the bulging youth 
population – the ability to be able to find jobs and opportunities not only in their country but 
across the continent.  
● The demand for jobs is rising and will continue to be the main socio-economic governance 
challenge for mist Africa governments. The Mo Ibrahim Foundation estimated that 1m 
unemployed youth enter the labour market each month and by 2030, it is expected that 30 million 
youth will be entering the African labour market each year214. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, while 
18 million jobs need to be created annually to absorb new entries in the labour market, only 3 
million formal jobs are currently being created215. It is estimated however that only 4% of new 
entrants between 2010 and 2020 have been able to find waged work in industry, and 21% in 
services216. 
● The Era of the 4th industrial revolution217 means a transition away from tradition employment 
creation sectors like agriculture, industry to service and technology-based sectors. In fact, there 
are signs that Africa is already experiencing a premature de-industrialisation. According to the 
2019 African Economic Outlook (AEO)218, the reallocation of labour has mainly tilted towards 
services. Industry's shares of employment and value added to GDP have grown very slowly. In this 
sense, Africa’s window for a labour-intensive industrialisation is closing much faster than 
previously expected. On the one hand, the number of people employed per unit of manufacturing 
output is declining due to the fast spread of technology. Consequently, the jobs of the future will 
be significantly technology based and, in the services, and e-commerce sectors. 
● People with disabilities (PWD) have an important role and contribution to make in Africa’s 
socio- economic development. It is crucial to ensure PWDs inclusive and active participation in 
the AfCFTA as outlined in the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Africa (referred to as the Africa Disability Protocol). Some 
of the best examples of PWDs inclusion in trade can be found in East Africa at the border between 
Rwanda and DRC, where they are very active in informal cross border trade.  
 
 
214 Mo Ibrahim report (2019) Africa's youth: jobs or migration? Demography, economic prospects, and mobility  
215 Mo Ibrahim report (2019) Africa's youth: jobs or migration? Demography, economic prospects, and mobility 
216 Ibid  
217 The 4th Industrial Revolution is largely driven by four specific technological developments: high-speed mobile Internet, AI and automation, 
the use of big data analytics, and cloud technology. 
218 AfDB (2019) Africa Economic Outlook - Developing Africa’s workforce for the future
=== PAGE 146 ===
 
144 
 
 
Somalia perspective  
Somalia population comprises of a significant youth and adolescent population with under half (45.6%) 
of the population being less than 15 years and around three-quarters (75%) of the population being less 
than 30 years old. In 2019, the International Labour Organization (ILO) estimated the labour force 
participation of men (15-64) to be 73.6% while women’s (15-64) labour force participation rate was 
estimated to be 23.1% with the figures remaining relatively unchanged over the past 10 years219. About 
49% of currently employed women aged 15-49 are self-employed (FGS, 2020c). As a result of the conflict, 
many women became the sole breadwinners and providers of the household, and the drivers of enterprise 
creation in Somalia (UN Women, 2016). Agriculture remains the biggest employer of both men and 
women at 79.2% and 83.9% of the labour force respectively. 
Life for women and girls in Somalia is challenging. Somalia ranks fourth lowest for gender equality 
globally, maternal, and infant mortality rates are some of the highest in the world, and early marriage is 
prevalent220.Given the male-dominated clan system and the absence of a systematic approach to promote 
inclusivity, Somali women largely remain excluded from key political and decision-making processes, 
despite the complex they continue to play in conflict, peace, and security.  They continue to remain 
underrepresented within national and regional decision and making policy-making bodies221.  
Women in trade  
The traditional role of women in the Somali economy was selling in market places; a position at the 
bottom of the value chain. The post -colonial era also improved the situation for women, as they were 
able to expand from the marketplace into the import and export industry. Currently, Somalia’s leading 
commodities for export are meat, hides, skins, dairy products, bananas, frankincense, and myrrh. Women 
have been able to engage in the trade of these products alongside their male counterparts. It has been 
estimated that Somali women comprise over 60 percent of business owners. Their businesses include 
microenterprises as well as medium to large-scale operations and others connected to the diaspora. 
Women-owned medium to large-scale businesses are concentrated around the import of clothes, 
cosmetics, furniture and perfumes. Women are especially active in the informal economy as petty traders 
(about 70%) and have also crept into typical male sub-sectors within the informal economy including: khat 
sales, currency exchange, and the fuel trade (AfdB & UN Women, forthcoming). 
Youth in trade  
Somalia youth face many challenges and there are a lot of factors affecting youth, such as limited 
employment opportunities/unemployment, violence and insecurity, low education quality, corruption 
and injustice, and political and administrative institutions dominated by adults in which youth are 
underrepresented222. A large proportion of the youth population in Somalia comes from rural areas 
(pastoralists and agro-pastoralists) and are moving to the urban areas (cities) when the quality of their 
livelihoods degraded due to famine and droughts which also affected the national economy since their 
production was vital. These youth have limited education and marketable skills for entering the work force 
within the country and overseas. 
 
219 ILO (2019)  
220 https://africa.unwomen.org/en/where-we-are/eastern-and-southern-africa/somalia 
221 Ibid.  
222 FGS (2020) The National Youth Policy of The Federal Government of Somalia
=== PAGE 147 ===
 
145 
 
 
Inclusive participation  
Somalia’s ratifications and implementation of the AfCFTA is expected to and should create opportunities 
for women and youth to actively participate and benefit from trade. For example, inclusive Informal cross 
border trade and E-commerce can be used to address the job and opportunity challenges faced by 
women, youth and PWDs. An AfCFTA STR that provides preferential treatment for women, youth, and 
PWDs would ensure their active participation and beneficiation in both formal and informal trade. Equally 
e-commerce can provide a level playing field where some of the unique barriers faced by the often-
marginalised groups are eliminated or the costs of participating are significantly lowered. However, it will 
be important to consider the gender digital divide and the need to address poor digital literacy and a lack 
of digital skills as one of the main drivers of the gender digital divide, and as a particular constraint to 
women’s participation in e-commerce. 
The upcoming negotiation of the women and youth protocol offers Somalia the opportunity to participate 
in the negotiations in addition to developing its own inclusive trade policies and strategies. There are 
numerous examples of interventions that have been implemented in the EAC that have unlocked the 
potential of women and youth in trade. It would be important for Somali to start by reviewing its existing 
trade policy and strategies to assess how effectively the empower women and youth to participate.  
Table 32 below details the corresponding issues identified and emerging policy actions.  
Table 32: Gender Policy Actions 
Issue identified   
Proposed policy action  
Ownership/lead 
entity  
Proposed source 
of funding 
Ensure 
equal 
participation 
of 
women in AfCFTA 
national coordinating 
& 
oversight 
structures  
 
Consult and ensure the equal participation of 
women-led organisations across sectors in all AfCFTA 
national coordinating structures, including inter alia 
National 
AfCFTA 
Committee, 
charged 
with 
coordinating 
AfCFTA 
implementation 
across 
Government 
& 
National 
Trade 
Facilitation 
Committee. 
MoCI 
working 
with 
Ministry of Women & 
Human 
Rights 
and 
Ministry of Youth & 
Sports 
External - UNECA, 
UN 
Women, 
Trademark Africa, 
SIDA, MasterCard 
Foundation 
Build the export and 
trading capacity of 
women-led business 
in the AfCFTA 
 
 
Develop and implement AfCFTA export-ready 
capacity development and training programmes for 
women entrepreneurs. 
Design 
context-specific 
business 
and 
entrepreneurship management programmes to 
strengthen women’s entrepreneurial skills, including 
through 
business 
development, 
leadership, 
mentorship, and networking. 
Empower women in 
regional value chains, 
corporate 
supply 
chains 
and 
public 
procurement 
Prioritize opportunities for women in high-value 
regional value chains: understand the terms of 
involvement for women by conducting gender-
focused sectoral value chain analysis to determine 
with accuracy where women and men are in various 
segments of the value chain. 
 
Improve access to education, specialized skills, 
vocational and on-the-job training that respond to 
identified causes of persistent gender-occupational 
segregation. 
 
Explore public-private sector partnerships that 
connect women-owned SMEs to regional markets by
=== PAGE 148 ===
 
146 
 
 
becoming certified suppliers of corporate supply 
chains.  
Design 
gender-responsive 
public 
procurement 
policies that integrate women-owned businesses in 
public procurement supply chains.  
Close the gender gap 
in access to finance  
 
 
Improve women-owned businesses access to finance 
to grow their businesses, including through a range of 
innovative financing instruments ranging from micro-
loans to venture capital. 
Collaborate with financial institutions to provide low-
interest loans for women entrepreneurs. Collaborate 
with commercial and microfinance banks and other 
partners on digital financial services and products.  
Design 
and 
implement a gender-
responsive 
trade 
facilitation 
agenda 
(including 
digital 
trade facilitation) 
Identify trade facilitation measures to improve the 
safety and boost the participation, especially of 
women traders, in small-scale cross-border trade. 
Measures could include improved security lighting as 
well as “at the border” infrastructure, such as proper 
storage, health, and sanitary facilities.  Implement 
gender sensitive training to customs officers and 
border officials at ports of entry and exit. 
Improved access to e-
commerce and digital 
trade solutions 
Develop and expand ICT and digital infrastructure. 
Support women’s participation in e-commerce 
through bridging the gender digital divide and 
addressing digital illiteracy and lack of digital skills as 
one of the main drivers of the gender digital divide, 
and a particular constraint to women’s participation 
in ecommerce. 
Implement digital trade solutions, including e-
transactions and e-payments, to improve efficiency 
in cross-border trade. Online payments such as 
mobile apps for small-scale cross-border traders, e-
logistics, and e-legislation are examples of digital 
trade solutions proposed to improve efficiency in 
cross-border trade. 
Implement digital literacy, education, and skills to 
support 
the 
equal 
participation 
of 
women 
entrepreneurs, small-scale and informal cross border 
traders in digital trade platforms to facilitate intra-
African trade.
=== PAGE 149 ===
 
147 
 
 
Cross cutting theme – Leveraging Technology  
Importance of digitization  
Digitization is disrupting global trade - the emergence of 4th industrial revolution i.e., cloud computing, 
Internet of Things (IoT) and advanced technology has become relevant for 21st century trade in terms of 
both goods and services. The increasing impact of digitization reveals that African economies should be 
harnessing digital trade to encourage sector- wide economic development. 
 
The potential for digital trade to drive economic development and transformation in Africa remains 
largely unexplored. With the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), which came into effect on 1st 
January 2021, there is now wider scope to pursue regional strategies to develop Africa’s digital economy. 
While e-commerce is thriving in some African countries, for example the mobile money market boom in 
Kenya and the robust growth of e-commerce platforms in Nigeria, these good outcomes are often 
confined to the domestic market with limited regional success. 
 
Digital trade, and its benefits for development can be derived in two ways;   
● Firstly, through e-commerce, that is, the use of digital platforms to facilitate trade in goods and 
services capable of both physical and digital delivery. The opportunities for African economies 
come through the increased connectivity of both local and foreign markets. 
o Growing internet use in Africa has been instrumental in providing an alternative route to 
market for SMEs and entrepreneurs who were previously hindered by the lack of 
connectivity, high transaction costs and information asymmetries.  
o E- commerce offers firms and entrepreneurs visibility at a low cost and businesses are 
increasingly able to leverage social medial platforms to market their products and 
services.  
o Increased connectivity also reduces the proximity barriers previously encountered when 
accessing new markets, especially for services capable of digital delivery. 
● Secondly, digital trade extends to the use of innovative technologies to enhance overall 
economic efficiency and productivity. The diffusion of digital technologies in sectors of prime 
importance for African countries, such as manufacturing and agriculture, could increase 
productivity and efficiency, making these sectors more competitive.  
o For instance, the combination of IoT, big data and cloud computing for precision 
agriculture results in more accurate crop and weather monitoring.  
o Further, productivity and efficiency in manufacturing can be increased by automation, 
robotics and 3D printing.  
o And increased digitization in manufacturing will intensify the demand for ICT services and 
business services, which are intermediaries in the production process. 
Regional and cross-border investment in infrastructure is critical. The rise in use of digital platforms does 
not reduce the need for traditional means of delivery - trade logistics still matter for digital trade. Poor 
quality roads and inefficient custom procedures tend to lengthen the time for delivery and increase 
shipping costs, which in turn influences purchasing decisions. Strong efforts and commitment are required 
to realize the infrastructure capacity and benefits outlined in the AU BIAT and PIDA action plans.  
 
Somalia perspective  
Somalia has a thriving E-commerce sector that has capitalised on the insecurity in the country to 
develop innovative online market solutions. Long beset by civil war, Somalia was among the last African
=== PAGE 150 ===
 
148 
 
 
nations to go online. Internet penetration remains low, high poverty levels persist, there’s lack of a strong 
central authority, weak regulatory policies, besides the absence of addresses and well-labelled streets, 
which is bound to create logistical inefficiencies for start-ups223. 
 
Despite this, or perhaps because of these challenges, the Horn of Africa nation is experiencing a strong 
rise in digital businesses, with local entrepreneurs building businesses that are disrupting existing trade 
models and transforming the way people shop224. The covid 19 pandemic boosted the sector with 
consumers using online platforms to source goods and services and then relying on the growing number 
of delivery companies to get the products and services to the consumer.  In Somali cities like Mogadishu, 
Hargeisa, and Garowe, there’s an emerging e-commerce market, with founders establishing consumer-
to-consumer, business-to-business, or business-to-consumer applications that allow for the purchase and 
dispatch of products or services. Together, these platforms are encouraging a budding tech sector, getting 
more people online, creating some much-needed jobs, and are attracting the attention of local angel 
investors—even if that’s on a smaller scale225. 
 
Somalia does not have a digital market strategy, nor has it developed an E-commerce strategy. The 
Ministry of Communication Technology (MoCT) is the lead Federal Government body mandated to 
formulate national policies, laws, and regulations related to postal services, telecommunications, and 
information and communications technology (ICT). The MoCT championed and supported the adoption 
of a foundational National Communications Law in 2017, which lays the basis for a competitive and 
enabling legal and regulatory environment for ICT services. However, Somalia still lacks many of the other 
foundational legal frameworks considered critical for developing a vibrant digital economy. 
 
The MoCT is currently also a key beneficiary of a World Bank-financed project, the Somalia Capacity 
Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP). The 
program seeks to strengthen government’s capacity to support wider access of digital-enabled services, 
where ensuring that the enabling legal framework is in place to support scale up in digital services is seen 
as critical. This project has three components. 1) The first component, Strengthening Institutions, is 
focused on stabilizing core government functions enabling access to services for individuals and 
businesses. 2) The second component, Enabling Financial and Digital Services, focuses on increasing 
individuals’ and businesses’ access to services that expand economic opportunities and help restore 
resilience in a gender-sensitive manner. 3) The third component, Project Management and Coordination, 
aims to fund project management and coordination activities226. 
 
Table 33 below summaries the corresponding issues identified and emerging policy actions.  
 
Table 33: Technology Policy Actions 
Issues identified   
Proposed policy action  
Ownership/lead 
entity   
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
Somalia does not have legislation to 
regulate data and consumer protection, 
data 
transfer, 
cybersecurity, 
and 
electronic transactions. 
Need to Fasttrack Somalia’s   digital 
economy legislation. 
MoCI 
and 
MoCT 
working with private 
sector  
Internal 
– 
FGS Budget  
 
223 https://qz.com/africa/1428066/somalias-e-commerce-start-ups-gullivery-saami-online-thrive 
224 Ibid  
225 Ibid  
226 https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/project-detail/P168115?lang=en
=== PAGE 151 ===
 
149 
 
 
Somalia doesn’t not have a digital 
market 
strategy 
or 
E-Commerce 
strategy  
Align the development of digital market 
strategy or E-commerce strategy with 
development on the digital trade 
protocol of the AfCFTA 
MoCI  
Internal 
– 
FGS Budget
=== PAGE 152 ===
 
150 
 
 
Cross cutting theme - Climate and environment  
Climate and trade  
Climate change is expected to have severe impacts across the globe – rising temperatures and seas, 
unpredictable weather, all of which will severely disrupt economic activity and life as we know it. Most of 
the African Economies are still agrarian based and dependent and hence changes in clime will have a 
significant impact. Most Africa agriculture is still rain fed and hence susceptible to climate variability – 
droughts and floods.   
● The expansion of global trade and the increasing integration of global value chains raise 
questions about how trade and the environment interact with each other. Trade can have both 
positive and negative effects on the environment227.  
o Economic growth resulting from trade expansion can have an obvious direct impact on 
the environment by increasing pollution or degrading natural resources. In addition, trade 
liberalisation may lead to specialisation in pollution-intensive activities in some countries 
if environmental policy stringency differs across countries 
o However, increased trade can in turn, by supporting economic growth, development, and 
social welfare, contribute to a greater capacity to manage the environment more 
effectively - improve access to new technologies that make local production processes 
more efficient by diminishing the use of inputs such as energy, water, and other 
environmentally harmful substances. Similarly, trade and investment liberalisation can 
provide firms with incentives to adopt more stringent environmental standards. 
o Direct consequences of climate change on trade could come from more frequent extreme 
weather events and rising sea levels. Supply, transport, and distribution chains 
infrastructure are likely to become more vulnerable to disruptions due to climate change. 
Maritime shipping, which accounts for around 80% of global trade by volume, could 
experience negative consequences, for instance from more frequent port closures due to 
extreme events.  
o More importantly, climate change is expected to decrease the productivity of all 
production factors (i.e., labour, capital, and land), which will ultimately result in output 
losses and a decrease in the volume of global trade. 
 
Climate in the AfCFTA  
● One of the key priorities of the AfCFTA is to implement a sustainable development to comply 
and reach the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted in the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. Climate Change consequences are negatively affecting African 
countries. The constant rise of temperatures is increasing the frequency and length of droughts, 
threatening water resources. Thus, the agriculture and public health sectors are heavily affected. 
 
Somalia Perspective  
Somalia is heavily dependent on agriculture and livestock exports both of which are very susceptible to 
climate impacts. Agriculture contributes to 75% of GDP and 93% of exports. The growth and viability of 
both sectors is threatened by increased temperatures and frequency of droughts. Expanding these key 
sectors through increased access to the Africa market will have climate and environmental impacts.  
 
227 OECD - How are trade and environmental sustainability compatible? https://www.oecd.org/trade/topics/trade-and-the-environment/
=== PAGE 153 ===
 
151 
 
 
Table 34 below details the issues identified and emerging policy actions.  
  
Table 34: Climate and Environment Policy Actions 
Issues identified   
Proposed policy action  
Ownership/lead entity  
Proposed 
source 
of 
funding 
Climate change poses a 
significant 
risk 
to 
the 
Somalia’s ability to expand 
agriculture and livestock 
production  
MOCI to work with the relevant 
ministries to develop a strategy on 
how production can be expanded 
without causing adverse effects on 
arable land and rangelands  
Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, 
Ministry of Livestock & Fishery 
Development, 
Ministry 
of 
Environment & Climate 
Change 
working with MoCI 
External 
- 
UNEP, UNECA, 
EU, FAO, IFAD, 
GCF 
Scaling up agriculture crop 
production may increase 
water insecurity   
MOCI 
to 
work 
with 
relevant 
ministries, agencies and private 
sector to introduce technology that 
can 
conserve 
water 
or 
plant 
varieties 
that 
are 
less 
water 
intensive  
Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, 
Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries 
External 
- 
UNEP, UNECA, 
EU, FAO, IFAD, 
GCF
=== PAGE 154 ===
 
152 
 
 
Cross cutting theme – Safe trade  
The global trade and investment regime has a profound impact on human rights, given that the promotion 
of economic growth may not lead to inclusive, sustainable and equitable development outcomes. Trade 
and investment regimes also overlap and interface with intellectual property, transfer of technology, 
climate change, and energy regimes. There are a number of issues to consider when thinking about safe 
trade; 
 
Trade and human rights  
In 2017, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights and the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung office in Geneva developed an ex-ante human rights impact 
assessment (HRIA) of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA)228. The report highlighted the 
interdependence and interrelationship between human rights, trade and sustainable development, by 
focussing on possible impacts on specific sets of rights (right to work, social security, adequate standard 
of living and right to food) and populations (women, youth, small-scale farmers and informal cross-border 
traders). The assessment made visible the situation of populations who would be left behind if trade 
negotiators only considered estimated economic growth without evaluating the potential distribution of 
the impacts and benefits of AfCFTA229. In implementing the national AfCFTA strategy, it would be 
important for the FGS to ensure the rights and targeted populations outlined above are enforced and they 
are included actively in the implementation process.  
 
Trade and pandemics  
COVID-19 containment measures (lockdowns, border closures, and social distancing) led to global demand 
and supply shocks. The pandemic has disrupted trade in the across the world including in Somalia with 
new border health checks leading to lengthy transport times. The pandemic illustrated the need to plan 
and have contingent health measures in pace that would not disrupt trade but keep trade logistics working 
and border open for trade. For example, in East Africa, during the height of the pandemic, TMEA and 
working with the EAC members States implemented a SAFE trade initiative that supported governments 
to undertake critical measures along the transport and trade routes that ensured trade continued safely 
while protecting livelihoods. Transport and trade routes were believed to be major infection conduits and 
presented a significant threat to the entire region, disrupting health, the economy, and regional and 
national supply chains. As a result, movement of cargo resumed and the region got back to trading which 
then facilitated the flow of vital supplies both for the pandemic but also for consumption. 
 
228 UNECA (2017) Human Rights and the African Continental Free Trade Area  - Taking Stock and Navigating the Way Forward 
229 Ibid
=== PAGE 155 ===
 
153 
 
 
 
Results framework  
From the Theory of Change in the strategic intervention section, we proposed several impacts, outcome, and output statements. Table 35 below 
provides a suggestion of potential indicators that can be used in the results framework for this strategy. The statements are already defined in 
strategic intervention section and hence will not be duplicated here.  
 
Table 35: Proposed Performance Indicators 
Measure  
Statement  
Proposed indicators  
Sources of data  
Impact 1 
Expand contribution of trade to Somalia’s GDP 
Trade as % of GDP with disaggregation for the federal states 
Somalis central bank data  
Ministry of Finance  
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
IFC Somalia annual report 
World Bank Data Bank  
Impact 2 
Sustained increase in Somalia’s income per capita 
and reduction in poverty 
Aggregated average GDP per-capita with disaggregation for the 
federal states 
National poverty rates (poverty headcount ratio) for the federal 
states   
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
World Bank Data Bank 
World bank Poverty database  
Impact 3 
Enhanced Economic and social stability  
Economic – growth of the economy as measured by GDP  
 
Social – price stability as measured by inflation  
Somalis central bank data  
Ministry of Finance  
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
Outcome 1 
Somalia 
implements 
AfCFTA, 
SAATM, 
FMP 
agreements and protocols.   
 
AfCFTA - Date of deposit of AfCFTA instruments of ratification  
SATAAM - % number of YD concreate measures implemented. 
FMP – Ranking on the AfDB visa openness index   
AfCFTA Secretariat  
AFCAC SATAAM implementation tracker  
AfDB Africa Visa openness index  
Outcome 2 
Reduced cost of trading between Somalia and RoA 
 
Reduction in the number of NTBs and NTMs reported on all modes 
of transportation – road, air and sea 
Cost of shipping a 20 and 40ft container to and from Somalia 
MOCI reports  
NTFC reports  
 Non-Tariff Barriers online reporting, monitoring, 
and eliminating mechanism. 
African trade observatory dashboard 
Outcome 3 
Increased Somalia trade and investment flows with 
RoA 
 
Value of Somalia’s trade with ROA disaggregated by REC 
Value of FDI inflows from ROA 
% Reduction in the trade deficit  
Somalis central bank data  
Ministry of Finance  
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
SOMINVEST 
Outcome 4 
Increased industrial capacity and value addition  
 
Share of manufacturing value added  
MVA per capita at national level  
 Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
MOCI data  
Outcome 5 
Improved and stable trade environment  
 % Number of businesses reporting a positive business climate  
Value of DDI committed to the trade and industry sector  
Value of remittances committed to the trade and industry sector  
 Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
MOCI data 
SOMINVEST
=== PAGE 156 ===
 
154 
 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation and Learning 
The results framework above has provided several proposed indicators that can be used to measure the 
impact of the implementation of the strategy. The list of indicators is not conclusive but provides guidance 
on a practical and tangible way of measuring the progress that will have been achieved. The strategy is 
expected to be implemented over a 5-year period starting in 2023. We propose the following approach 
to monitoring, evaluation and learning. 
 
● Monitoring the progress in implementation – this could be done on an annual basis using the 
results framework provided above. This can be converted into a log frame which then provides 
annual targets / milestones to be achieved. Gender and inclusion indicators and outcomes should 
be clearly defined and mainstreamed across all programmes that emerge from the strategy. This 
should start from initial design through to evaluation. These should look beyond sex, age or 
disability disaggregated data and seek to address additional key barriers captured in qualitative 
insights gathered from beneficiaries. An annual assessment should be undertaken, and a report 
written to outline the progress made against the indicators. The reports can then be used to 
inform and guide the ongoing implementation of the strategy.  
● Evaluation of the strategy – this should be done at the mid and end term of the strategy. The 
evaluation will mainly focus on whether the implementation of the strategy is delivering on the 
outcome and impact statements outlined in the results framework. The overall approach adopted 
in measuring impact at the intervention level should focus on the OECD-DAC evaluation criteria: 
Relevance, Effectiveness, Efficiency, Impact and Sustainability. Approaches to evaluation should 
be participatory in terms of target stakeholders and beneficiaries of the AfCFTA to understand the 
full impact of the implementation of the AfCFTA 
● Lessons and impact stories – this would be an important way of tangibly demonstrating the 
impact of the strategy to stakeholders. Given the low level of awareness of the AfCFTA coupled 
with the significant policy engagement that will be required to make it a reality, it is important 
that a learning strategy is developed. This together with the communications and dissemination 
strategy will be vital in helping shape the discussion on the implementation of the AfCFTA.
=== PAGE 157 ===
 
155 
 
 
Communication and visibility framework  
Consultations with stakeholders and the private sector survey have outlined the need to develop a 
revamped and effective approach to communicating the AfCFTA to its key stakeholders. Now that 
trading has started more than ever an effective communications plan will be required to not only build 
knowledge and awareness but also to educate those involved in AfCFTA related trade on their roles and 
responsibilities in making these important agreements function effectively.  In creating a communication 
and visibility strategy the following will need to be considered.  
Communicating reforms in the strategy  
● Work closely with the private sector through their representative bodies. Concentrated effort 
to understand their views. For example, work with the PS to develop joint opinion pieces aimed 
at communicating the importance of the reforms and help advocate for faster implementation of 
reforms.  
● Need to focus on the youth and women as a key demographic and focus on the jobs and 
employment. Need to use the social media platforms and influencers. Youth and female 
empowerment are critical. 
● Share the lessons learned and what could have been done better. Need to ensure a robust M&E 
structure that helps understand what has been achieved. This will help to build the credibility that 
drives the reform process. 
Improving awareness of the AfCFTA within Somalia 
● Simplify the trade information in a way that it can be effectively communicated to a range of 
stakeholders. The context and its framing are critical in getting the message across. Using motion 
graphics, infographics, and short videos to distil at a quick glance to stakeholders. Checking back 
to see how the messages were received and how effective they were.  
● Work closely with the media to inform the wider public on the costs and benefits of the trade 
related reforms. The media tools and channels have evolved and hence a multimedia approach 
to target the audiences needs to be mapped out. 
● Ensure there is ownership of messaging by both governments and the regional institutions. 
These institutions must be seen as the drivers for the change, and they are driving the reforms. 
For example, in the implementation of the Safetrade initiative - regional electronic cargo and 
driver tracking system - TMEA did most of the work. However, it was sold as an EAC reform which 
has then facilitated the success in addressing the impact of covid19 on trade in the region.  
● Messaging must be at different levels - need to focus on the private sector as the key drivers of 
the reforms at the national level. Need to manage expectations but still have numerous challenges 
and in the case of the AfCFTA there is a need to ensure that the challenges are effectively 
communicated in order not to lose the momentum.
=== PAGE 158 ===
 
156 
 
 
Budget Framework 
 
Approach to funding the strategy 
The elaboration of this Somalia National AfCFTA Strategy has taken place at a time when the COVID-- 
19 global pandemics has impacted both global trade and growth. Resources at both the national and 
regional level have been constrained while at the same time those organisations that used to support 
trade infrastructure and capacity building investments, have experienced severe cuts to budgets or 
reallocation to support COVID- 19 mitigation efforts. The above notwithstanding, trade and the AfCFTA is 
still viewed as a key component of the post COVID- 19 recovery. There is still strong interest at national 
and international level to support the implementation of the AfCFTA. Consequently, this document is 
expected to help its key funders to understand what strategy aims to achieve over the next five years and 
hence serve as a tool for its fundraising efforts. 
 
It is understood that the policy interventions outlined in this strategy will be competing with other 
national policy priorities like the humanitarian situation brought on by the drought that the country is 
experiencing. That said, trade, services, investment, and ecommerce sectors play a critical and vital role 
in growth, employment, job creation and in enhancing and securing the livelihoods of millions of 
Somalians. The key is to be able to sell the strategy as an important and integral part of the country’s post 
covid 19 and drought recovery plan. Taking this approach would open more avenues of funding from a 
range of bilateral and multilateral partners who may not traditionally support the trade sectors but 
recognise the linkages and important role trade and the AfCFTA can play in the recovery efforts.  As with 
any strategy, it is inevitable that prioritisation will have to be implemented in the allocation of the scarce 
resources that the strategy may attract.  
 
Financing AfCFTA implementation will require a combination of interventions at national, regional, and 
continental levels. Consultations with the MOCI and other stakeholders that have been funding trade 
related interventions in Somalia (and in the EAC region) indicate that there is an appetite and interest to 
support the implementation of this strategy. Table 36 below provides a mapping of bilateral and 
multilateral stakeholder that are funding trade related interventions and could be approached to support 
the implementation of components of this strategy.
=== PAGE 159 ===
 
157 
 
 
 
Table 36: Mapping potential sources of funding for AfCFTA implementation 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
AfDB 
● Infrastructure (Water and sanitation, Energy, Roads, etc.) 
● General development finance support to Member States at 
bilateral level 
● Providing budget to the AfCFTA secretariat 
● AfCFTA institutional support 
● Partnering with AfCFTA secretariat to stimulate industrial 
initiatives and programmes 
● Support in AfCFTA effective implementation  
● Increase in the economic and social integration projects to 
break the trade barriers 
● Supporting in the development of a framework for the AfCFTA 
academy 
● The AfCFTA Secretariat Signs Protocol of Agreement with The 
African Development Fund For $11 Million Institutional 
Support Project For Effective Implementation of The AfCFTA 
 
● Support to mobilize the private sector to 
contribute more effectively to the 
implementation of the AfCFTA Agreement 
● Fight against terrorism 
● Support in promotion of agriculture 
● Support in economic diversification 
 
● Somalia is a member of the AfDB 
● Somalia can be supported at national level-Technically and 
financially 
● Somalia has been given by AfDF (A subsidiary of AfDB) a $ 
5.4 millions to build food security. 
● by AfDF (A subsidiary of AfDB) approved $4.3 million grant 
to Somalia for statistics development 
● AfDB supported Somalia in improving its internal revenue 
collection. 
● AfDB is a partner in Somalia infrastructure Fund (SIF) called 
AfDB multi-partner infrastructure fund and this fund 
received US$3 million from IsDB - The SIF’s goal is to support 
and accelerate Somalia’s inclusive and sustainable economic 
recovery, peace and state building within the context of 
AfDB’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building 
Resilience in Africa (2014-2019). The focus of the SIF is the 
rehabilitation and development of infrastructure, and 
related skills development and institutional capacity 
building. 
● African Development Bank Group signs $28.8 million grant 
deal with Somalia for road and water projects 
● Capacity building 
● Support in water infrastructure development in Somalia 
● Strengthening institutions for reduction of proliferation of 
small arms. 
● Approval of a $5.4 million grant to build food security 
● Support on adaptation to climate change 
● Road infrastructure programme 
● Technical assistance a capacity building for setting up 
regulatory authority for energy sector 
Trade and development Bank 
(TDB) 
● social and economic infrastructure 
● Trade promotion 
● Socio-economic development 
● Regional economic integration  
● The Project and Infrastructure Finance 
business support TDB’s mission to 
advance regional growth - higher export 
efficiency and the generation of forex via 
strategic investment in transport and 
logistics; and in general, supporting local 
ownership, import substitution, creation 
of employment, strengthening of value 
chains, increase in production, and 
promotion 
of 
trade 
and 
regional 
integration, including cross-border trade 
via infrastructure. 
● Somalia is a member of the Eastern and Southern Africa 
Trade and development Bank- The project’s main 
Beneficiaries are the Trade and Development Bank (PTA 
Bank) regional member States, namely: Burundi, Comoros, 
China, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, 
Mauritius, Rwanda, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe. 
● Somalia can be supported at national level-Technically and 
financially 
●
=== PAGE 160 ===
 
158 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
Afrexim Bank 
● Providing budget support to the AfCFTA Secretariat,  
● AfCFTA Adjustment Facility 
● Pan-African Payments and Settlements System,  
● African Trade Exchange (ATEX) in collaboration with UNECA,  
● Continental Transit Guarantee Scheme,  
● Intra-African Trade Fair editions  
● It supports businesses at country level to trade continentally 
using a dual approach: it includes a free online component on 
the Afreximbank Academy, while ITC facilitates in-country 
workshops to train business owners, business support 
organizations and government stakeholders. 
● Afreximbank offers a range of financing programmes, 
solutions and advisory services to support the expansion, 
diversification, promotion and development of intra- and 
extra-African trade and trade development project 
● Focuses on private and public loans and it classifies public 
loans as “As” 
● Trade Information and Advisory Services 
● Capacity building 
● General support to Member States at 
bilateral level  
● Trade finance 
●  
 
● Somalia is not a member of the Afrexim Bank. 
● Somalia can be supported at national level-Technically and 
financially 
●  
Trademark 
● Trade facilitation reforms  
● Trade Infrastructure – OSBPs, Border markets,  
● ICT4Trade infrastructure  
● Research and capacity building   
● Trade policy 
● Standards and SPS 
● Business Competitiveness 
● Women in trade 
● Sustainable and Inclusive trade 
● Safe trade emergency facility programme 
● Support 
countries 
private 
sector 
institutions to perform better. 
● Trademark works in Somaliland 
● Can support projects at the national level-Technically and 
financially 
● Trademark East Africa invested together with ADFD and 
DPW into transport and trade infrastructure in Somaliland in 
2016. 
● Trademark improves the efficiency of doing trade in 
Somaliland. - By Improving efficiency and capacity building 
and logistics networks, reduced nob tariff barriers and 
developing standards 
UNDP 
● Direct support to the AfCFTA Secretariat through a financial 
grant of US$3 million. This will enhance AfCFTA Secretariat 
advocacy among policy makers, business, civil society, 
academia, youth and other stakeholders. 
● Capacity building  
● Partnership signed between AfCFTA secretariat and UNDP to 
support the largest trade area towards inclusive growth in 
Africa 
● UNDP’s interventions are realized through direct support to 
inclusive trade integration through collaboration with the 
AfCFTA Secretariat and actions focusing on small-scale 
businesses (mainly women- and youth- led businesses), 
including those operating at the borderlands. 
● UNDP’s Africa Regional Programme (2018-2021) has provided 
support to the AfCFTA at national, regional, and continental 
● Strengthening the readiness of small 
businesses to participate in AfCFTA 
marketplaces 
● UNDP supported Uganda to bring the 
AfCFTA to life 
● Support 
governments 
to 
create 
awareness on the country’s trade policy 
and market access potential linked to the 
AfCFTA. 
● Somalia is a member of the UNDP 
● Can support projects at the national level 
● Supports the Somalis in drought proofing Somali’s 
rangelands 
● programmes help the Somali government and people access 
the skills, technology and funding they need to drive their 
own development in areas including climate adaptation and 
mitigation, gender empowerment, the rule of law, national 
and local governance, job creation and skill development, 
innovation, peacebuilding and more.
=== PAGE 161 ===
 
159 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
levels. This support included collaboration with the African 
Union Commission, the AfCFTA Secretariat in Accra, Ghana, 
Regional Economic Communities, Countries, Private Sector, 
and Academia. This support contributed to ensuring, inter 
alia, that regional growth and structural transformation is 
inclusive, transformational, and sustainable with reduced 
economic inequalities. The program was anchored using a 
‘regional lens’ that promotes a coordinated approach and 
coherence between regional and national level interventions 
that align to regional frameworks and policies across Africa. 
Specifically, this program seeks to provide direct support at 
the national level, in coordination with partners, to the public 
and private sectors, to ensure that the opportunities in the 
AfCFTA can be maximized. 
● The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the 
International Trade Centre (ITC) team up to empower African 
small businesses, women and young entrepreneurs to 
leverage the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) 
and expand cross-continental business opportunities. 
● As AfCFTA States Parties start trading under the AfCFTA on 1 
January 2021, UNDP continues to strengthen implementation 
of Africa’s integration agenda through an AfCFTA regional 
project for the period 2022- 2025 and national level 
interventions. These efforts are expected to make 
contribution to Africa’s structural economic transformation – 
accelerating industrialization, value addition, diversification, 
and sustainable economic and social empowerment. 
Dedicated actions are deployed to support, at national, 
regional, and continental levels, strengthening the capacities 
of women and youth-owned enterprises to utilize the AfCFTA. 
● Supports AfCFTA for women entrepreneurs to be included in 
the implementation of AfCFTA.  
● Promotion of free trade 
UNIDO 
●  Development and harmonization of industrial policy  
● Building capacity on intellectual property  
● AfCFTA awareness campaigns 
● Advocacy on the need for deepening private sector 
engagement and commitment. 
● Promotion of the green hydrogen economy and the pan 
African trade. 
● Trade capacity building 
●  
●  
● Somalia is a member of UNIDO. 
● Can support projects at the national level 
● Partnering for stability and recovery in Somalia 
● Agro-technology development for economic growth in 
South and Central Somalia 
● Porductive sectors development programme for Somalia 
● Business incubators to support entrepreneurship and MSME 
creation in Somalia 
● UNIDO 
promotes 
a 
partnership 
in 
delivering 
agromechanization trainings 
● UNIDO and UNDP are working together to support MSME 
development and access to finance in Somalia
=== PAGE 162 ===
 
160 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
● UNIDO launches the Somalia chapter of BIC Africa to develop 
Somalia Business Incubators Ecosystem 
● UNIDO and ITPO Italy support Somalia at Macfrut 2022 fruit 
and vegetables exhibition in Italy 
● Facilitate in the partnership of the Somali private sector and 
other international companies. 
● UNIDO and UNDP Somalia works together to provide access 
to finance for small businesses in Beletweyne(Somalia) 
●  UNIDO Somalia funded by AICS through the Enterprise 
Development Unit (EDU), kick-starts TVET in Kismayo to 
enhance skills in demand in the labour market 
● UNIDO boosts confidence and investments of local 
manufacturing capacities 
● UNIDO 
supports 
one-on-one 
business 
counselling 
programme 
● UNIDO 
offers 
Somali 
businesses 
opportunities 
for 
international partnerships 
● Somalia experts from Somalia EDUs network, Somalia 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, IBS Bank, Sominvest 
and Federal Ministry of Commerce and Industry, among 
others, receive UNIDO’s Computer Model for Feasibility 
Analysis and Reporting (COMFAR) training 
●  
UNECA 
● Capacity building and research  
● Technical support to the AfCFTA negotiations while deploying 
efforts to support policy making towards an effective 
implementation. 
● Supporting African countries to develop National Strategies to 
implement 
the 
AfCFTA 
Agreement 
through 
gender 
mainstreaming in the AfCFTA implementation. 
●  
● we support the AfCFTA national strategies 
implementation in our Member Countries 
by harmonizing customs codes with new 
tariff provisions, applying rules of origin, 
and training AfCFTA national stakeholders 
● Somalia is a member of UNECA. 
● Can support projects at the national level 
UNCTAD 
● Online mechanism for the Reporting, Monitoring and 
Elimination of Non-Tariff Barriers; 
● Technical support to the AfCFTA negotiations while deploying 
efforts to support policy making towards an effective 
implementation. 
● Supports African forum for national trade facilitation 
● Africa e-trade 
● Helping African countries to fight against illicit financial flows 
ad trade in Africa. 
● Contribute to achieving structural transformation for 
inclusive and sustainable development in the subregion, with 
a focus on deepening regional integration. 
● Economic and social information systems in support of 
sustainable development and regional integration in Africa 
●  
● Somalia is a member of UNCTAD 
● Can support projects at the national level
=== PAGE 163 ===
 
161 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
● E-government core indicators 
● Strengthening entrepreneurship and the private sector 
● Deepening regional integration and trade for structural 
transformation 
● Promoting services exports and reviewing services policies 
● Providing technical assistance in trade-in-services statistics 
● Building capacities in trade in services 
● Building capacities in industrial policymaking 
ITC 
● African Trade Observatory and online Tariff Negotiations 
Portal; 
● Capacity building and advisory services that will enhance a 
continental business environment, strengthen national and 
regional trade support institutions and improve the 
competitiveness of MSMEs, women and youth. 
● Enabled hybrid workshops between AfCFTA secretariat and 
other key stakeholders for AfCFTA to communicate the 
opportunities offered by a single market and the barriers to 
overcome. 
● Suporting in the sensitization and engagement of the private 
sector into the AfCFTA. 
● Creating a ONE TRADE AFRICA programme 
● Has products relevant for the AfCFTA implementation. 
● Thematic workshops on the rules of origin and other topics 
which are included in phase 2 of the negotiations (digital trade 
and investment) 
● Awareness of the AfCFTA opportunities for MSMEs, women 
and youth through HYBRID EVENTS. 
● ITC’s partnership with the African Export-Import Bank 
(Afreximbank) supports innovative, green finance solutions, 
strengthens Africa’s creative economy through tailored 
trainings – with 5,000 small businesses skilled so far – and 
promotes African business opportunities within the 
Caribbean region. 
● Through its SME Trade Academy, ITC and Afreximbank 
developed an e-learning course on How to Export with the 
AfCFTA 
● In its continued commitment to further intra-African export 
potential, Afreximbank has teamed up with ITC to support 
small businesses, especially women and youth entrepreneurs, 
to make the most of the Free Trade Area. 
● Through the trainings, entrepreneurs can easily find tailored 
market opportunities for their businesses, identifying the 
highest export potential for their products and how to 
capitalize on potential financing opportunities. The trainees 
also have access to trade financing and trade facilitation 
interventions offered by Afreximbank to support intra-African 
● Since 2021, a number of activities aiming 
at contributing to outputs 1 and 3 were 
launched. The last workshop took place 
on 30 March 2021 in Rabat with the Arab 
Maghreb Union (AMU) and Egypt to 
explain the benefits of the AfCFTA to 
MSMEs, women and youth entrepreneurs 
in North Africa 
● Training sessions on E-commerce and 
trade and market intelligence as well as on 
How to export under the AfCFTA were 
delivered. 
● ITC has also organized another hybrid 
workshop in Harare with the Ministry of 
trade, ZimTrade and OWIT. The meeting 
has 
focused 
on 
market 
access 
opportunities for women entrepreneurs 
under the AfCFTA regime.  
●  
● ITC is doing some activities in Somalia 
● Can support projects at the national level
=== PAGE 164 ===
 
162 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
trade. Over 5,000 small businesses have been trained so far. 
Next to English and French, the training will soon be available 
in Arabic and Portuguese as well. 
● It supports businesses at country level to trade continentally 
using a dual approach: it includes a free online component on 
the Afreximbank Academy, while ITC facilitates in-country 
workshops to train business owners, business support 
organizations and government stakeholders. 
AfroChampions Initiative 
● Has already committed through its members a US$ one 
million budget to support an AfCFTA outreach and advocacy 
campaign. 
● Coming up with a Trillion Dollar Investment Framework,  
● The Accelerating Virtual-Resilient Integration for a Vibrant 
Africa (AVRIVA), and  
● Other IT solutions and private sector led programmes for 
enhancing investment and trade, safe and smart travel as well 
as virtual diplomacy; 
● African 
entrepreneurs 
leveraging 
the 
Afrochampions 
platform to bring forward proposals and ideas to inform the 
implementation of the AfCFTA. 
● TradeMark East Africa (TMEA) and the AfroChampions 
Initiative (ACI) have this evening signed a partnership 
agreement committing to provide support to governments 
and the private sector in realising the Africa Continental Free 
Trade Area 
● Promotion of the AfCFTA 
●  
● AfroChampions Initiative works with African countries. 
● Can support projects at the national level 
Africa eTrade Group  
● The Sokokuu Africa eCommerce platform which aims at 
registering 250 thousand Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs) on their platform by the end of March 2021 and 6 
million SMEs and 22 million jobs by the end of 2023 
● This platform will enable African countries to exchange 
commercial documents such as the certificate of origin and 
the phytosanitary certificate which will help accelerate and 
improve reliability of processing of trade documents 
●  
● Can support projects at the national level 
Development partners  
The European Union, German 
Government 
through 
Gesellschaft fur Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ) 
and 
Physikalisch-Technische 
Bundesanstalt (PTB), the Danish 
Government, 
the 
Canadian 
Governemnt, 
the 
USA, 
the 
Australian Government, the UK 
Government through FCDO and 
● A multitude of financial and technical support to the AfCFTA 
process and implementation  
●  
● The government of italy contributes additional us$2 million 
to the psdp to boost job creation, access to economic 
opportunities for youth and women, promote msmes 
development and strengthen governance to boost economic 
growth in somalia. 
●
=== PAGE 165 ===
 
163 
 
 
Entity  
Specific areas of support for AfCFTA 
Support at national level for AfCFTA 
Relevance for Somalia  
ODI, 
French 
Government 
through 
Expertise 
France, 
Commonwealth Secretariat, the 
Organization International de la 
Francophonie (OIF),
=== PAGE 166 ===
 
164 
 
 
Risk management framework  
Implementation of the AfCFTA in Somalia has and will continue face several challenges that the MOCI and 
other trade related ministries in the FGS will need to address if the agreement is to deliver the expected 
benefits for all (see table 37).  
Table 37: Risk mitigation matrix 
Type of risk  
Description  
Approach to mitigation   
Strategic 
FGS and the federal states may not 
demonstrate 
the 
level 
of 
commitment needed to ensure the 
success of the AfCFTA. 
Continuous communication and visibility, advocacy, and 
engagement with key stakeholders during the implementation 
of the strategy to secure and maintain political buy in. 
Consulting fully with the stakeholders so that the strategy 
remains relevant to their needs. 
Networking and establishing meaningful partnerships in 
support of delivery of the strategy  
Economic 
Some sectors will benefit more 
than 
others 
from 
the 
implementation of the AfCFTA. 
The strategy should clearly demonstrate the long-term 
benefits of sustainable trade policies to the private sector. 
Developmental  
Some segments of the Somali 
population are left out of the 
beneficiation of the AfCFTA – 
youth, women, and PWDs. 
 
The strategy fails to result in 
delivering on aspects of the SDGs 
to which Somalia has made 
commitments 
- 
gender, 
environment, climate change); 
MOCI  to mainstream youth, gender and PWDs in the 
implementation of the strategy.  
 
 
Operational 
FGS is unable to raise enough 
funding to implement the strategy  
 
Delays in the ratification of AfCFTA 
and its protocols and annexes  
Delays in the ratification of key 
agreements like the FMP and 
SAATM 
Poor visibility of the impacts and 
benefits of the strategy  
MOCI need to draw up a funding strategy that will help raise 
financial support and commitment to support implementation 
at both the regional and national levels. 
MOCI working with trade related ministries in the FGS 
implement an effective strategy that will help inform policy 
makers of the cost and benefits of ratification  
MOCI working with trade related ministries in the FGS 
implement an effective strategy that will help inform policy 
makers of the cost and benefits of ratification 
Follow Proactive, timely and planned communication and 
visibility actions throughout the duration of the strategy 
Technical 
Delayed 
progress 
in 
the 
implementation of the AfCFTA that 
could impact the usefulness of the 
strategy 
Effective coordination between the MOCI working with trade 
related ministries in the FGS and the AfCFTA Sec to ensure the 
AfCFTA negotiations are concluded by early 2023 and 
ratifications follows as per agreed timetable  
Political 
Lack of political will both in FGS and 
at Federal state level to drive the 
ratification 
and 
facilitate 
the 
implementation of the AfCFTA 
MOCI to coordinate with the Federal states on how to keep 
politician, policy makers and the Somali public of the costs 
and benefits of the AfCFTA. Need to generate a high level of 
awareness of the AfCFTA
=== PAGE 167 ===
 
165 
 
 
Institutional arrangements for the implementation  
Multilateral trade arrangements like the AfCFTA require institutions to coordinate the activities of the 
Member States, to ensure uniformity in compliance, and to monitor implementation. Implementation of 
the AfCFTA will require effective coordination at both the continental, regional and national levels. It’s 
important to note that it’s the members States that sign the AfCFTA agreement and hence are the parties 
bound by the treaty’s obligations. Nevertheless, the AfCFTA agreement recognises the important role that 
the RECs must play in supporting and facilitating the implementation of the agreement. Consequently, at 
each level the following governance arrangements are in place or are in the process of being implemented  
 
Continental level governance  
The governance framework for the implementation of the AfCFTA is outlined in the treaty and has been 
covered in the introductory section of this strategy. In summary, the institutional framework for its 
implementation consists of the;  
● Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the AU is the highest decision-making organ 
of the AU, they have the exclusive authority to adopt interpretations of this Agreement on the 
recommendation of the Council of Ministers. The decision to adopt an interpretation shall be 
taken by consensus. 
● Council of Ministers (consisting of the Ministers of Trade of the State Parties) report to the 
Assembly through the Executive Council. The Council of Ministers meet twice a year in ordinary 
session and may meet as and when necessary, in extraordinary sessions. Decisions taken by the 
Council of Ministers, while acting within its mandate, shall be binding on State Parties. Decisions 
that have legal, structural, or financial implications shall be binding on State Parties upon their 
adoption by the Assembly. The State Parties shall take such measures as are necessary to 
implement the decisions of the Council of Ministers. 
● Committee of Senior Trade Officials (consisting of Permanent or Principal Secretaries or other 
officials designated by each State Party) The committee is tasked to monitor and keep under 
constant review and ensure proper functioning and development of the AfCFTA in accordance 
with the provisions of this Agreement; etc. Subject to directions given by the Council of Ministers, 
the Committee of Senior Trade Officials shall meet at least twice a year and shall operate in 
accordance with the rules of procedures as adopted by the Council of Ministers. The Committee 
shall submit its report, which may include recommendations, to the Council of Ministers following 
its meetings. The RECs shall be represented in the Committee of Senior Trade Officials, in an 
advisory capacity. 
● AfCFTA Secretariat is the administrative organ to coordinate the implementation of the AfCFTA. 
The Secretariat is responsible for convening meetings, monitoring, and evaluating the 
implementation process and other duties assigned to it by the Committee of Senior Officials, 
Council of Ministers, and the AU Assembly. 
 
The AfCFTA treaty in its preamble acknowledges the existing RECs and Free Trade Areas as building 
blocs towards the establishment of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA).  Nevertheless, the 
treaty ambiguous on the RECs in its governance arrangements. This omission and its potential implications 
in the effective implementation of the AfCFTA has been recognised. At the 33rd Ordinary Session of the 
African Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government held in February 2020 it was agreed that the 
AfCFTA Secretariat, the Commission, and the Secretariats of the Regional Economic Communities to 
develop a Framework of Collaboration to enhance complementarity, synergies, and alignment of 
programme and activities and in the process, generate high impact results. At the 13th Extraordinary 
Session of the Assembly on the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) on 5th December 2020 it
=== PAGE 168 ===
 
166 
 
 
was agreed that the parties should conclude work on the collaboration framework by February 2021 and 
that upon its completion, the Framework of Collaboration will become an Appendix to the Protocol on 
the Relations between the African Union and the Regional Economic Communities. The ratification of this 
collaboration framework is expected to provide the legal framework for the RECs to have legal standing 
in the implementation of the AfCFTA. Without this framework, they only play a role through supporting 
their member state parties in agreed common positions on AfCFTA agenda.  
 
Regional level governance  
Somalia has officially joined Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) after having 
fulfilled the terms and conditions of accession, the country was a signatory and full member of the bloc, 
but it failed to negotiate this transition due to lack of a government as the civil war had engulfed the 
country in 1991. The government of Somalia is working on how the COMESA agreement should be ratified 
through the parliament.  
 
National level governance  
State Parties are the signatories to the AfCFTA and other regional integration agreement. As such the 
implementation of the AfCFTA will require significant work at the national level to undertake negotiations, 
ratify those agreements and protocols, communicate the importance of the agreement to the domestic 
audience etc. The effectiveness of the AfCFTA is premised on the political will to domesticate it at member 
State level. Weak implementation will result in the delayed delivery of the benefits of the agreement.  
 
Role of cabinet 
The cabinet is formally known as the Council of Ministers of the Federal Government of Somalia are 
appointed by the Prime Ministers. Their main role is to endorse policies and issue Ministerial decrees from 
each office (Ministries and Agencies). The cabinet passes policies as a policy maker which are then sent to 
the parliament for approval. The cabinet also proposed laws/acts to submit to the parliament for their 
approval. Usually the two house of the parliament (upper and lower houses) reads the laws/acts three 
times protocol before the presidents signs. For example, the AfCFTA agreements signed through the 
cabinet then waiting the parliament to read and ratify the agreement. 
Role of MOCI 
The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) of the Federal Government of Somalia is responsible trade 
promotion, investment climate, industrial and private sector development. the operational mandate is to 
formulate, review and support policies, strategies, plans and programs that promote and ensure 
expansion also the diversification of trade, cooperatives, environmentally sustainable industrialization, 
appropriate technology development and transfer to generate wealth for poverty eradication and benefit 
the country socially and economically.  
Role of National Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC) 
The National Trade Facilitation Committee (NTFC) is established in 2019 by the Prime Minister. The 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry proposed the economic sub-committee of the cabinet the importance 
of this committee, hence, prepared the terms of reference and the organizational structure. The mandate 
of the National Trade Facilitation Committee NTFSC is to:  
● Act as a coordinative and consultative body, it means to coordinate public sector agencies and 
promote cooperation between the public, the private sector and international organizations on 
implementation of good trade practices.
=== PAGE 169 ===
 
167 
 
 
● Champion of trade logistics reforms in consultation with the relevant entities, identify and 
spearhead policy, legal, administrative and institutional reforms to enhance trade. 
● Monitor all the trade reforms, to track, evaluate and report to the Minister of Commerce and 
Industry for onward submission to Cabinet, the implementation of trade reforms and 
interventions benchmarked against international, regional and bilateral requirements. 
● communicate trade reforms to increase public awareness of trade facilitation measures, practices 
and standards. 
Membership of the NTFC consists of representatives of public sectors as follows:  
● Prime Minister/Deputy Prime Minister (Chair),  
● Minister of Commerce and Industry (Co-chair), 
● Office of the President,  
● Office of the Prime Minister,  
● Ministry of Finance,  
● Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation,  
● Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development,  
● Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation,  
● Ministry of Livestock and Forestry,  
● Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources,  
● Ministry of Transportation and Civil Aviation,  
● Ministry of Port and Marine Transport,  
● Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources,  
● Ministry of Water and Energy Resources,  
● Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, State Attorney Office. 
Implementation Mechanism. 
State Parties are the signatories to the AfCFTA and other regional integration agreement. As such the 
implementation of the AfCFTA will require significant work at the national level to undertake negotiations, 
ratify those agreements and protocols, communicate the importance of the agreement to the domestic 
audience etc.  The effectiveness of the AfCFTA is premised on the political will to domesticate it at member 
State level. Weak implementation will result in the delayed delivery of the benefits of the agreement. In 
Somalia, there two governance arrangements at the national level that are critical to; 
 
● Parliamentary (Upper House and Lower House)– in each of the member States parliaments, there 
are committees at which all matters related to trade law formulation and implementation are 
discussed. In the case of Somalia, the two houses each one of them has a committee who 
oversights all the policies, laws and agreements with the relevant Ministry or agency. Trade issues 
in under the economic committee of the parliament who deals these issues. This is going to be 
one of the most important efforts Somalia’s ratification of the AfCFTA and for the amendment of 
domestic laws to align them with the objectives of the AfCFTA and other regional agreements. 
● Economic sub-committee of Cabinet/ National Trade Facilitation Committee – this committees 
is part of the executive arms of government and are tasked with the formulation and 
implementation of trade policies, strategies, and implementation plans. They offer a whole of 
government coordination together with other key stakeholders.  
 
The cabinet passes policies as a policy maker which are then sent to the parliament for approvals. 
The cabinet also proposed laws/acts to submit to the parliament for their approval. The NTFC also 
monitors all the trade reforms, to track, evaluate and report to the Minister of Commerce and
=== PAGE 170 ===
 
168 
 
 
Industry for onward submission to Cabinet, the implementation of trade reforms and 
interventions benchmarked against international, regional and bilateral requirements. And finally 
communicate trade reforms to increase public awareness of trade facilitation measures, practices 
and standards.
=== PAGE 171 ===
 
169 
 
 
 
Somalia AfCFTA National Strategy Action Plan  
Issues identified  
Policy actions  
Somalia trade & macroeconomic situational analysis 
● Chronic and unsustainable trade deficit. This is currently financed by remittance flows which are 
susceptible and vulnerable to global shocks, for example COVID-19 pandemic.  
● Implementing the AfCFTA will offer Somalia opportunities to expand its access to the African market 
and in turn generate export revenue and taxes to increase its domestic revenue collection.  
● Poor domestic resource mobilisation.  
● Trade related reforms, including the implementation of customs systems and trade facilitation 
reforms, should increase domestic revenue collection.  
● Limited exports, with poor export diversification. Somalia’s exports are mainly comprised of live 
animals and raw agricultural goods.   
● Opening of the regional export market through implementation of the AfCFTA, targeting specific 
African export markets for value added exports in livestock and agro-processing.  
Private sector knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA 
● EAC is a key African market for both Somali exports and imports.  
● Fast tracking the harmonisation of the Somalia trade regime with the EAC would enhance its 
integration in to the AfCFTA and the continental market.  
● Trade facilitation remains a key barrier both for exporters and importers. Barriers include (i) 
unnecessary customs controls; (ii) multiple testing agencies; (iii) excessive data and documents 
collection; (iv) compliance with standard; and (v) unnecessary roadblocks and random checks.  
● FSG working with the private sector to conduct three audits on NTBs that traders face when 
importing or exporting via Road, Air and Sea, coordinated by NTFC. 
● MOCI and relevant bodies to undertake a review of existing trade compliance procedures and 
requirements & mapping of entire importing and exporting journey with the view to simplifying and 
digitising them.  
● Low level of awareness of the AfCFTA and its associated costs and benefits  
● MOCI to develop a civil society education and communications strategy that would increase the 
knowledge and awareness of the AfCFTA & EAC.  
● MOCI to work closely with other government ministries and agencies to build knowledge and 
awareness of the AfCFTA within the FGS. 
● MOCI to work with private sector representative organisations to continue to build awareness and 
knowledge of the costs and benefits of the AfCFTA. 
● Visa access and air connectivity are critical for Somali companies looking to access the African 
market  
● Develop roadmap for FMP & SAATM ratification to speed up ratification.   
● Enhanced access to shipping lines is vital for Somalis to exploit market opportunities along the East 
African Coast and the Indian ocean states.  
● FGS to FastTrack implementation of National Blue Economy Strategy.  
● Targeted and consistent engagement with the private sector.  
● Enhance participation of private sector in NTFC through platforms where specific reforms can be 
discussed and implemented with private sector input on trade and industrial policy.  
Pillar 1: Fast tracking accession and ratification of treaties
=== PAGE 172 ===
 
170 
 
 
● Somalia is yet to ratify the AfCFTA agreement by depositing the instruments of the ratification with 
the AUC 
● FGS to Fasttrack ratification process in the parliament  
● Somalia has signed the FMP Protocol but has not made progress to move to ratification. Somalia 
needs to make the case for FMP ratification. Where there are concerns, these need to be addressed 
and the benefits of ratification outlined to facilitate the process. 
● Develop roadmap for FGS ratification  
● A study to model the costs and benefits of ratification of the FMP – full, partial, and non-ratification. 
These will help policy makers at all levels fully internalize the opportunity cost of non-ratification. 
● FGS Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation to implement a strategy to push for visa 
reciprocity that would open effective visa liberalisation between Somalia and the rest of Africa.  
● Somalia is ranked as one of the least compliant countries with regards to the implementation of the 
SATAAM protocol and liberalization measures  
● FGS and SCAA Authority should work with AFCAC to create greater awareness of the SAATM  
● MoCI, Ministry of Transport & Aviation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation to 
develop action plan to develop National Aviation/Air transport policy 
● Somalia has no aviation competition and consumer protection legislation which is a prerequisite for 
SATAAM implementation  
● FGS and SCAA to work with AFAC to seek support in developing the aviation competition and 
consumer protection legislation  
● Limited understanding of the costs and benefits of liberalizing the Somalia air transport market  
● SCAA to undertake an assessment of the costs and benefits of liberalizing the Somali aviation sector 
to promote increased intra-African connectivity and travel  
Pillar 2: Aligning Domestic policy and legislation with AfCFTA 
● Multiplicity of customs codes across Somalia’s federal states which prevents effective trade 
facilitation and harmonisation with the rest of Africa 
● Map custom codes and custom processes differences across federal states and seek to harmonise 
codes, systems, and procedures 
● Not clear that Somalia’s new customs code is harmonised with AfCFTA tariff regime 
● Ministry of Finance, Revenue Department, to map and harmonise unified Somali customs code with 
EAC and AfCFTA frameworks and a pathway to AfCFTA tariff harmonisation  
● AfCFTA lists of the sensitive and excluded products yet to be agreed hence an opportunity for 
Somalia to engage and influence the negotiations  
● MoCI to develop a schedule of sensitive and excluded product lines for the AfCFTA, in consultation 
with federal state government agencies and the private sector 
● The treatment of intermediate goods under the AfCFTA is not yet clear.  
● FGS to review its new industrial strategy to clarify it would be affected should agreements be 
reached on the treatment of intermediate goods in the AfCFTA.   
● Lack of customs systems interconnectivity may hamper the trade with RoA 
● SOMCAS to be connected to regional customs systems to facilitate smooth customs trade and data 
sharing with will reduce customs revenue leakages  
● Numerous NTBs have been identified in the perception survey  
● Implementation digital platforms that monitor and facilitate trade. Systems like the electronic single 
window, electronic cargo tracking, NTB monitoring and resolution platforms. 
● Gaps in harmonisation of Somalia’s trade legislation with regional and international frameworks 
e) 
Trade in goods & services   
f) 
IP, competition, investment, digital trade, and women & youth 
● Comprehensive mapping of current trade legislation against the various agreements that Somalia is 
negotiating (WTO, EAC, COMESA, AfCFTA)
=== PAGE 173 ===
 
171 
 
 
● There is limited awareness and lack of capacity & technical expertise across government to deliver 
on the above.  
● Underdeveloped policies & strategies and implementation (trade, industrial strategy, investment)  
● Mapping status and gaps of existing policies and strategies  
● MOCI to publish to other government departments the strategies that they have developed to aid 
cross-ministerial cooperation. 
● Initiate consultation process on current and new policies/strategy reforms across government. 
● Coordination & harmonisation of policy and strategy implementation to achieve coherency across 
government  
● Underdeveloped incentive frameworks to promote trade & industrialisation 
● Comprehensive study to map current incentives to promote trade & industrialisation with a specific 
focus on gaps that need to be addressed  
● Limited evidence to support development of good policy & legislation, with disparate trade related 
databases 
● Develop a roadmap on how trade related government bodies can improve the collection, reporting 
and access to trade data  
● Limited awareness of existing policy & legislation 
● Develop action plan on how to increase awareness of trade policy and reforms across all segments of 
society  
● Somalia can adopt & benefit from tried and tested trade policy & legislation in the region & ease of 
harmonisation with already established trade frameworks 
● Compile examples of good policy & practice that has delivered improved trade & industrial 
performance in the region 
● Significant interest from international & donor community to support policy and legislation reform  
● MOCI to develop a costed trade reform action plan to be shared with potential development 
partners/donors interested in supporting trade related reforms, using MoCI annual workplan 
Pillar 3: Aligning regulation & standards with AfCFTA 
● Current trade related regulation and standards lag regional & international good practice. 
 
● Map gaps between domestic and African standards (with ARSO & ASO)  
● Prioritise harmonisation of Somali standards with regional standards – upon EAC accession, Somalia 
will be able to adopt EAC standards as a member state 
● Underdeveloped domestic standards to facilitate internal trade 
● MOCI & SOBS to undertake a common-sense assessment of what a domestic standards regime 
should look like to facilitate value addition  
● Limited capacity within established trade regulation & standards agencies to develop & administer 
regulations and standards 
● SOBS to identify technical assistance required to develop and regulate Somalia’s domestic & 
international standards regime.  
● Fastrack full ISO membership  
● Expand scope of support from ARSO, beyond technical assistance 
● Limited evidence base to support development of regulations and standards 
● Develop a repository of standards regulations and related data that would facilitate reforms  
● Limited awareness of existing regulations & standards 
● SOBS to push standards agenda within government by publishing quarterly updates on progress 
being made on standards reforms & hosting national conferences with key stakeholders.  
● SOBS to increase awareness of standards reforms and compliance to private sector – providing 
regular workshops with traders.
=== PAGE 174 ===
 
172 
 
 
● Somalia National Quality Infrastructure policy is currently under development  
● Develop sector specific action plan to implement the Somalia National Quality Infrastructure policy  
● SOBS is not yet accredited and requires technical assistance to achieve accreditation  
● Develop a roadmap outlining the reforms and investment required to upgrade SOBS labs to meet 
international accreditation standards. 
● Develop a human resource gaps analysis & action plan to build domestic technical capacity to 
implement both domestic and international standards 
● Somalia in a position to benefit from and adopt tried and tested regulations and standards & ease of 
harmonisation with already established trade frameworks 
● Request examples of good policy & practice that has delivered improved standards and regulation in 
the region from ASSO & ASO  
Pillar 4: Infrastructure to boost Somalia’s trade with Africa 
● No specific prioritization of trade infrastructure in the SNIS 2019-2063 
● MOCI to work with key ministries involved in infrastructure planning to identify infrastructure needs 
to facilitate regional trade from existing policy framework (SNIS 2019- 2063; Somalia TSNA & 
Investment Programme)  
● Insecurity along Somalia’s traditional trade routes increases costs and limits opportunities.  
● Map key security related bottlenecks in Somalia’s main trade routes/corridors  
● Diaspora has shown interest in supporting Somalia’s growth however there is no concerted efforts to 
tap into their expertise.  
● Explore opportunities to build domestic capacity, including diaspora investment, to participate in 
infrastructure development/upgrading/rehabilitation 
● Somalia needs to enhance its road infrastructure connectivity to established regional trade corridors  
● identify gaps in Somalia’s infrastructure connectivity with established regional trade corridors and 
develop action plan to connect developing regional trade corridors with Somalia 
● No clear estimation of the cost and value of trade infrastructure needed to improve access to 
markets 
● MOCI to work with key ministries involved in infrastructure planning to draw from SNIS 2019- 2063 
and Somalia TSNA & Investment Programme to quantify regional trade related infrastructure gaps 
● Somalia’s main port is rapidly reaching its full capacity utilization. Other ports around the country are 
underdeveloped and yet they have significant potential  
● MOCI to work with main port authorities, & key industries involved in infrastructure planning, to 
identify opportunities to maximise utilisation of existing ports 
● No available mapping of potential strategies for trade infrastructure development.  
● MOCI & key industries involved in infrastructure planning to identify potential and existing partners 
that will support development/upgrading/rehabilitation of its regional trade related infrastructure  
Pillar 5: Enhancing Somalia’s industrial capacity under the AfCFTA 
● Industrial strategy has been developed however it lacks and implementation action plan  
● MoCI to develop an action plan to implement recommendations in existing industrial strategy  
● There is an ongoing push to support industrialisation. This would require the divesture of 
government owned industrial assets. There is no PPP law that would provide an alternative option to 
outright sale of these assets  
● MoCI to fast-track development of Somalia PPP law with a view to facilitating the disposal of 
redundant state industrial assets. 
● Feedback from new investors in the industrial sector indicate the lack of awareness of the incentives 
available to them  
● Operationalise incentives national investment policy that would drive FDI & DDI towards 
industrialisation, including SEZs 
● Industrial strategy does not clearly articulate the approach to tapping into regional value chains  
● Assessment of how Somalia’s industries could be linked into regional value chains so to access 
technology and expand industrial capacity that generates growth across sectors, including SEZs
=== PAGE 175 ===
 
173 
 
 
● There is little or no data on industrial output that would facilitate decision making especially in 
relation to incentives for the sector 
● Develop framework that enhances industrial data collection that will facilitate implementation of 
policy and strategies 
● No existing strategy to guide value addition in the agriculture and livestock sector 
● Develop a national agro-processing strategy linked to off-setting imports and expanding value added 
exports in sectors where Somalia has a comparative advantage (livestock, fisheries)  
● Somalia doesn’t have a strategy that would guide its policy to reduce its trade deficit and its policy to 
increase domestic industrial capacity 
● Identify opportunities for import substitution that could be addressed through industrial policy and 
strategies 
● There are opportunities for Somalia to export value added goods in agriculture, livestock, and 
fisheries. These opportunities need to be assessed and communicated to the private sector.  
● Identify opportunities where Somalia has a comparative advantage in exporting value added goods  
Pillar 6: Market access and trade facilitation 
● Significant NTBs and NTMs (non-tariff measures) in Somalia’s internal and domestic, regional & ROW 
& no mechanism in place to monitor NTBs & NTMs (reporting & addressing) 
● Diagnostic study on NTBs & NTMs affecting Somalia’s trade  
● Develop a digital framework for reporting and resolving NTBs  
● Establish NTB monitoring committee as a sub-set of NTFC (including port, airport, revenue and 
customs, border force, and security authorities) 
● High cost of trade – transportation, procedures  
● Audit to ascertain the true cost of trading across Somalia’s borders (land, air, and sea)  
● High levels of informal trade with immediate neighbours  
● Ascertain value, levels, and composition of informal trade with Somalia’s immediate neighbours.  
● Develop a simplified trade regime (STR) to support ICBT 
● Lack of data on ICBT  
● Develop framework for collecting and reporting ICBT data at land borders 
● Enforcement and compliance with domestic regional and international trade standards 
● Harmonising domestic, regional, and continental standards to facilitate Somalia’s market access  
● High cost of market entry and high cost of trade facilitation, with lack of data to support market 
access strategies and address trade facilitation barriers 
● Undertake assessment of the costs of accessing new markets in the region (Indian Ocean States – 
Mauritius, Seychelles, and Madagascar, and states on East African coastlines – Mozambique and 
Tanzania)  
● Established digital trade information portal addressing trade facilitation barriers  
● Expand existing trade information portal to provide a framework for identifying trade facilitation 
barriers 
● Established framework for trade facilitation coordination  
● Strengthen the mandate and decision-making power of Somalia’s National Trade Facilitation 
Committee (NTFC) 
Pillar 7: Strengthening capacity to deliver Somalia’s National AfCFTA Implementation Strategy 
● Consultations indicate that FGS will need support to enhance its capacity and capability to negotiate 
the phase 2 protocols 
● Identify capacity gaps linked to Phase II AfCFTA negotiations.  
● Enhance and widen training on trade related policy across FGS ministries and agencies 
● The NTFC needs technical assistance to strengthen its ability to coordinate trade reforms across 
government and the private sector  
● Seek funding to support technical assistance to the NTFC 
● No centralized or digitized trade data reporting framework 
● MOCI to work with National Bureau of Statistics to develop a digitised & centralised reporting 
framework for trade data
=== PAGE 176 ===
 
174 
 
 
●  
● Identify diaspora trade, investment, and industrialisation expertise to facilitate Somalia’s 
implementation of national and AfCFTA trade strategies  
●  
● Identify opportunities to leverage African regional integration experts to support the 
implementation of Somalia’s AfCFTA National Strategy 
●  
● Identify prioritised technical assistance gaps that could be funded by the donor/international 
community  
Pillar 8: Enhancing Somalia’s capacity to implement Phase II AfCFTA Protocols 
● Current IP law & regulatory framework is outdated  
● Develop IP policy strategy and legal framework  
● No entity in place to regulate and manage IP  
● Assess most appropriate entity to regulate the sector, learning from regional examples 
● Awareness of AfCFTA IP protocol across FGS  
● MOCI organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to validate its IP 
negotiating paper   
● Implementation of the AfCFTA IP protocol  
● Identify IP priorities that would a) inform Somalia’s IP policy and strategy b) support the 
development of both institutional and regulatory IP frameworks 
● FIL is established (legal framework) and investment policy & strategies are under development, but 
no clear roadmap on how these will be aligned to the AfCFTA protocol on investment 
● Develop an AfCFTA investment strategy paper focused on intra-African FDI opportunities  
● No current specific or articulated strategy to attract Somali diaspora in Africa to invest 
● Ensure that Somalia’s National Diaspora Policy (SNDP-22) includes a chapter on attracting 
investment form its diaspora in Africa for strategy development.  
● Fastrack development of Somalia Diaspora Investment Policy  
● Awareness of AfCFTA investment protocol across FGS  
● MOCI to organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to validate its AfCFTA 
investment strategy  
● Implementation of the AFCFTA investment protocol   
● Identify investment priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s investment frameworks and what 
is being proposed under the AfCFTA  
● No competition law and related regulatory framework 
● Develop competition legislation & regulation  
● Awareness of AfCFTA competition protocol across FGS  
● MoCI organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to validate its 
competition strategy   
● Implementation of the AfCFTA competition protocol 
● Identify competition priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s competition priorities and what 
has been agreed under the AfCFTA competition protocol  
● There is no e-commerce policy, strategy, and law but they are currently being drafted  
● Develop an AfCFTA digital trade protocol strategy focused on digital trade opportunities in Africa 
● Awareness of AfCFTA digital trade protocol across FGS  
● MOCI & MOCT to organise workshops for stakeholders across and outside government to validate its 
digital trade strategy
=== PAGE 177 ===
 
175 
 
 
● Implementation of the AfCFTA Digital trade Protocol 
● Identify digital priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s digital trade priorities and what is 
being proposed under the AfCFTA  
● No specific or articulated policy & strategy to address participation of women and youth in trade 
(formal & ICBT) 
● Develop an AfCFTA women and youth in trade protocol position paper focused on opportunities to 
improve the participation of women and youth in trade in Africa (formal & ICBT)  
● Implementation of the AfCFTA Women and Youth in trade protocol  
● Identify women and youth in trade priority areas of alignment between Somalia’s priorities and 
develop a strategy  
Pillar 9: Enhancing trade opportunities   
● National Blue Economy Strategy is in place but needs an Action plan and coordination forum to 
ensure its effective implementation  
● Develop a BES action plan and set up an institutional coordination platform that will oversee the 
implementation of reforms contained in the strategy  
● Current Somalia port infrastructure needs investment to order to improve functionality and 
efficiency. The port at Mogadishu is rapidly reaching its operational capacity   
● FGS needs to develop a national port development strategy that prioritises the investment required; 
investment options i.e., PPP etc, and operational models 
● Somalia’s shipping sector is underdeveloped with low levels of investment. Somalia had not 
developed a national shipping line that would enhance its access to the African continent and trade 
● FGS to develop a national shipping development strategy that would help guide and incentivise 
investment in the sector  
● Somalia doesn’t have a systematic record of marine information critical to guiding and informing 
policy development and reforms that would unlock its maritime resource potential  
● FGS to develop a comprehensive maritime database that will allow the collection of several maritime 
indicators as well as a comprehensive resource base where data for both natural and human capital 
aspects are to be evaluated and quantified. 
● Somalia’s BE potential affected by insecurity and risk perceptions. Maritime border disputes are 
constraining the ability to exploit its maritime resources 
● Improve regional peace and security: This will foster the development of all the Blue Economy 
● sectors, including easing tensions linked to maritime boundaries. 
● Limited value addition in the key blue economy subsectors specifically fishing. Most of Somalis fish 
exports have little or no value add.  
● FGS to develop a value addition strategy that would guide investments by both the public and 
private sector to maximise the value addition capacity and capability in Somalia’s fishing sector  
● Capacity constraints within the marine and shipping sectors undermines the ability to implement 
good governance 
● FGS to seek support from international maritime agencies willing to help build the capacity of its 
blue economy ministries and agencies  
● Somalia’s tourism potential is limited by security concerns and the lack of appropriate infrastructure  
● Developing strong inter-sectoral linkages is necessary to ensure greater capture of tourists’ 
expenditures. This will facilitate the transfer of economic benefits from the sector to the local 
communities thereby contributing to improved livelihoods and poverty reduction 
● Industrial policy is in place, however, there is no strategy to guide implementation  
● MoCI develop an industrialisation strategy that operationalises the recently developed industrial 
policy 
● The industrial policy alluded to promoting Made in Somalia however, there is no specific strategy on 
how this objective will be achieved 
● MoCI to develop a domestic market recapture strategy that clearly outlines how the Made in 
Somalia will be operationalised  
● No local content policy to drive local value addition   
● Develop a national local content strategy that will develop an incentive structure for local value 
addition
=== PAGE 178 ===
 
176 
 
 
● SEZ Act is in place but it’s not clear whether there is a policy of strategy to guide and drive 
implementation. 
● Develop SEZ Policy and Strategy  
● No diagnostic of which sectors and product lines will be prioritised in the domestic industrial 
promotion  
● Undertake a study to inform the prioritisation of sectors and product lines that would form the basis 
for the investor attraction  
● Somalia does not have an ICBT policy or strategy and yet a significant amount of trade takes place at 
this informal level  
● MoCI to develop ICBT policy and strategy  
● There is very little data on cross border trade which limits the development of effective policies to 
guide the trade and maximise the benefits for all  
● MoCI to work with relevant federal states and FGS ministries and agencies to agree a farmework for 
collecting and reporting ICBT data 
 
● Strengthen/establish ICBT data collection and analytical capacities at key border points to gauge 
ICBTs contribution to the economy. 
● It’s not clear that any simplified trade regime is in operation at the key border points where ICBT 
trade is taking place – Somalia’s borders with Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti 
● MoCI to review regional STRs and their applicability at the relevant borders to facilitate trade.  
● Women and youth continue to face challenges in trading across borders  
● Prioritize a gender and youth-based approach to ICBT which address some of the pervasive 
constraints that afflict women and youth participation in trade. 
● Intensification of cross border policy dialogue will build an understanding of local cross border 
dynamics. 
● Mainstream ICBT in national and regional economic policy dialogues. 
● Cross border payments systems remain a challenge  
● The promotion of suitable financing solutions is of critical importance for informal and small-scale 
traders. Traders without bank accounts are often locked out of formal processes. Electronic payment 
systems for cross-border payments can cut the security risks for informal traders and represent an 
opportunity to formalise trade. 
Cross Cutting Pillar interventions  
● Ensure equal participation of women in AfCFTA national coordinating & oversight structures.  
 
● Consult and ensure the equal participation of women-led organisations across sectors in all AfCFTA 
national coordinating structures, including inter alia National AfCFTA Committee, charged with 
coordinating AfCFTA implementation across Government & National Trade Facilitation Committee. 
● Build the export and trading capacity of women-led business in the AfCFTA 
 
 
● Develop and implement AfCFTA export-ready capacity development and training programmes for 
women entrepreneurs. 
● Design context-specific business and entrepreneurship management programmes to strengthen 
women’s entrepreneurial skills, including through business development, leadership, mentorship, 
and networking. 
● Empower women in regional value chains, corporate supply chains and public procurement 
● Prioritize opportunities for women in high-value regional value chains: understand the terms of 
involvement for women by conducting gender-focused sectoral value chain analysis to determine with 
accuracy where women and men are in various segments of the value chain. 
● Improve access to education, specialized skills, vocational and on-the-job training that respond to 
identified causes of persistent gender-occupational segregation.
=== PAGE 179 ===
 
177 
 
 
● Explore public-private sector partnerships that connect women-owned SMEs to regional markets by 
becoming certified suppliers of corporate supply chains.  
● Design gender-responsive public procurement policies that integrate women-owned businesses in 
public procurement supply chains.  
● Close the gender gap in access to finance  
 
 
● Improve women-owned businesses access to finance to grow their businesses, including through a 
range of innovative financing instruments ranging from micro-loans to venture capital. 
● Collaborate with financial institutions to provide low-interest loans for women entrepreneurs. 
Collaborate with commercial and microfinance banks and other partners on digital financial services 
and products.  
● Design and implement a gender-responsive trade facilitation agenda (including digital trade 
facilitation) 
● Identify trade facilitation measures to improve the safety and boost the participation, especially of 
women traders, in small-scale cross-border trade. Measures could include improved security lighting 
as well as “at the border” infrastructure, such as proper storage, health, and sanitary facilities.  
Implement gender sensitive training to customs officers and border officials at ports of entry and 
exit. 
● Improved access to e-commerce and digital trade solutions 
● Develop and expand ICT and digital infrastructure. 
● Support women’s participation in e-commerce through bridging the gender digital divide and 
addressing digital illiteracy and lack of digital skills as one of the main drivers of the gender digital 
divide, and a particular constraint to women’s participation in ecommerce. 
● Implement digital trade solutions, including e-transactions and e-payments, to improve efficiency in 
cross-border trade. Online payments such as mobile apps for small-scale cross-border traders, e-
logistics, and e-legislation are examples of digital trade solutions proposed to improve efficiency in 
cross-border trade. 
● Implement digital literacy, education, and skills to support the equal participation of women 
entrepreneurs, small-scale and informal cross border traders in digital trade platforms to facilitate 
intra-African trade. 
● Somalia does not have legislation to regulate data and consumer protection, data transfer, 
cybersecurity, and electronic transactions. 
● Need to Fasttrack Somalia’s   digital economy legislation. 
● Somalia does not have a digital market strategy or E-Commerce strategy  
● Align the development of digital market strategy or E-commerce strategy with development on the 
digital trade protocol of the AfCFTA 
● Climate change poses a significant risk to the Somalia’s ability to expand agriculture and livestock 
production  
● MOCI to work with the relevant ministries to develop a strategy on how production can be expanded 
without causing adverse effects on arable land and rangelands  
● Scaling up agriculture crop production may increase water insecurity   
● MOCI to work with relevant ministries, agencies and private sector to introduce technology that can 
conserve water or plant varieties that are less water intensive
=== PAGE 180 ===
 
178 
 
 
Commissioned by the Federal Government of Somalia 
 
 
Funded by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 
 
 
 
Written by Vanguard Economics Ltd 
 
 
Vanguard Economics Ltd. 
Kigali, Rwanda 
+250 786 131 488 
info@vanguardeconomics.com 
www.vanguardeconomcis.com
=== PAGE 181 ===
179
