=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
 
  
UPDATED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION (NDC)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JULY 2021
=== PAGE 2 ===
Foreword
We are delighted to have completed an enhanced Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDC) for Somalia in line with the global requirement and in fulfillment of the obligations
under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Despite being an insignificant contributor to the problem of greenhouse gases (GHG)
emissions which cause climate change, Somalia remains one of the most vulnerable
countries to the vagaries of climate change. Droughts and flash floods that impoverish
and displace hundreds of thousands have become an annual event with more intensity
and even greater impact.
Nonetheless, Somalia has in this NDC committed to take action and reduce its
estimated projected emissions of 107.40 MtC02eq in 2030 by 30%. This is in the
context of sustainable development and poverty eradication. The country will however,
put greater emphasis on adaptation to build resilience and cope with the worsening
situation. The NDC outlines different adaptation initiatives to be implemented over the
next 10 years to 2030 at an estimated cost of US Dollars 48.5 billion.
Addressing climate change is an important step toward achieving peace and stability in
Somalia. Conflict and extremism has to a large extent been fueled by the climate crisis
and natural resource degradation. The Federal Govemment of Somalia, recognizes this
reality, and continues to mainstream climate actions into the national development
strategies.
We call upon our development partners and the intemational community to support the
implementatio of the NDC which sets the country on a path of low emission and
climate re lent evelopment.
H.E. Mahdi Mohammed Gulaid
Deputy Prime Minister
Federal Government of Somalia
OOO
VVERNMEt•41
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Content 
Foreword .................................................................................................................................................... 2 
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................................. 4 
1. 
Background ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 National Circumstances .............................................................................................................. 1 
1.2 Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 2 
2.0 
Methodological Approach ........................................................................................................ 2 
3.0 
National Policies, Legal and institutional Frameworks .................................................... 3 
2.1 Policy and legal Frameworks ..................................................................................................... 3 
2.2 Institutional Arrangements ......................................................................................................... 4 
4.0 
Somalia’s Contribution to addressing climate change .................................................... 5 
4.1 
Mitigation contribution .............................................................................................................. 5 
4.1.1 
Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding ........................ 7 
4.2 Adaptation Contribution ............................................................................................................. 9 
4.2.1 Adaptation actions and estimated cost ........................................................................... 9 
4.4 Gender Mainstreaming .............................................................................................................. 12 
5.0 
Means of Implementation for both Adaptation and Mitigation Actions ...................... 12
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
 
 
 
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
AFOLU: 
 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Uses  
BAU: 
 
 
Business As Usual  
CO2: 
 
 
Carbon dioxide 
DoECC: 
 
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change  
FGS: 
 
 
Federal Government of Somalia 
GHG:  
 
Greenhouse Gas 
IDP: 
 
 
Internally Displaced Persons 
INC: 
 
 
Initial National Communication to the UNFCCC 
IPCC:  
 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
LDC: 
 
 
Least developed Country  
MtCO2eq: 
 
million tonnes (megatonnes) of carbon dioxide equivalent  
NDC:  
 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NCCP:  
 
National Climate Change Policy 
NCCC: 
National Climate Change Committee (NCCC) 
NDP:  
 
National Development Plan  
NAP: 
 
 
National Adaptation Plan  
REDD+ 
 
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation  
SDG:  
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
UNDP:  
 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNFCCC: 
 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
 
1 
 
1. Background 
 
1.1 National Circumstances 
Somalia has an estimated population of about 16 million, with 80 percent of the population being 
youth, almost 50.14 % being female and remaining being male1. Roughly 60 percent of the 
population are nomadic and semi- nomadic pastoralists and 60 percent live in rural areas. The 
country is considered among the poorest countries in the world with more than 69% of the 
population living below the international poverty line.2 
 
Somalia continues to grapple with a fragile political system, insecurity, high levels of poverty, 
climate change-related shocks coupled with the COVID-19 pandemic. The latter resulted in a 
GDP reduction by 1.5% in 2020 compared to the 2.9% growth experienced in 2019.3 Overall 
economic growth was also hampered by a reduction in Foreign Direct Investment (FD1) due to 
the contentious 2021 Federal Government of Somalia elections, livestock export bans by Gulf 
nations, shrinking remittances due to COVID 19 impact, and global recession.  
The country has little historical or current responsibility for global climate change but suffers 
disproportionately from the climate crisis.  Climate change-related droughts, intermittent floods 
and desert locust infestation results in loss of livestock and agricultural production which account 
for more than 70% of GDP while employing millions directly and indirectly. The destruction of local 
communities’ main livelihood bases continues to increase the number of internally displaced 
persons and resultant humanitarian crises. Furthermore, climate change and variability impacts 
and conflicts are interlinked in Somalia and affects the affect the most vulnerable (particularly 
women and children) and resource-dependent communities. 
Somalia is showing progress with recently found stability albeit multi-faceted challenges in 
economic, political and social aspects. Therefore, Somalia’s priority for the next decade is to spur 
sustainable economic growth through leveraging its natural resources and enhancing living 
standards for its population. The implementation of this NDC is consistent with Somalia’s National 
development agenda and reaffirms Somalia’s commitment to playing its role in addressing the 
climate change threat in line with the Principles and provisions of the UN Framework Convention 
and the Paris Agreement. 
It is under these aforementioned National circumstances and in line with Article 4.9 of the Paris 
Agreement that Somalia presents its updated NDC to the UNFCCC. The implementation of the 
NDC requires cooperation, support and investments from both National stakeholders and 
International partners. 
 
 
1 National Development Plan -9 2020-2024 
2 Ibid 
3 African Development Bank, 2021 African Economic Outlook 2021
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
 
2 
 
1.2 Introduction 
Somalia submitted its first NDC in November 2015 and remains committed to achieve the targets 
despite its challenges and national circumstances. Sustainable development, peace building and 
adaptation to climate change remain the highest priority for Somalia. Consistent with UNFCCC 
decisions and guidelines, Somalia has taken steps to prepare and submit this revised NDC to 
guide its climate change action agenda for the next almost 10 years and contribute to the global 
efforts to combat climate change.  
Somalia has remained susceptible to climate change and resultant shocks due to its geographical 
setting with over 80% of the country considered Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALS). Much of the 
brunt has been felt in the agriculture and livestock sector which together account for more than 
70% of livelihood base for majority of the population. Somalia is one of the poorest nations in 
Africa with 69% of the population living below the poverty line. Somalia’s current GHG emissions 
are relatively low estimated at an estimated 53.70 MtCO2eq, representing less than 0.03 percent 
of total global emissions. However, it is expected that the sustained stability and peace will 
demand reconstruction and development on a larger scale leading to increased GHG 
emissions(estimated to double) under business as usual scenario. 
Given the climate change impact on Somalia’s development agenda and the urgent need for 
assessing the global effort’s aggregated ambition included the updated NDC’s of all parties to the 
Paris Agreement, Somalia is pleased to submit information on its NDC update to the UNFCCC 
secretariat for consideration. 
2.0 
 Methodological Approach 
Somalia’s updated NDC was prepared through an inclusive, consultative multi-stakeholders 
technical and policy dialogues. Broad-based Federal and State level consultative workshops and 
engagements involving Government institutions (both Federal and State level), NGOs, CBOs, 
private sector, academic, and research institutions were undertaken throughout the process.  
UNFCCC decisions and Somalia’s National development policies, strategies and action plans 
guided the NDC update preparation process. Priority actions for both adaptation and mitigation 
sectors were identified through a review of various climate change and National development 
relevant documents/reports and in consultation with all relevant stakeholders.  
The Initial National Communication (INC) 2018 and recent technical mitigation analysis for NDC 
update were the foundation for the mitigation sector scenario analysis. Studies specific to Somalia 
were difficult to find for many mitigation options. The overall potential of each mitigation option 
was estimated by reviewing the best available primary and secondary data on the existing 
prevalence of the practice or technology, then conducting research or making assumptions about 
the amount of deployment that was possible or reasonable. Once this was determined, scenarios 
were developed that calculated the emissions impact of the mitigation option and its aggregate 
cost at the deployment scale determined to be appropriate with a start date of 2021 and an end 
date of 2030.
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
 
3 
 
It is important to note that in some cases the INC data was found unrealistic by experts 
considering in comparison  with information from other neighbouring countries in the eastern 
Africa  and other similar countries (in terms of fragility, economic and population sizes) and similar 
growth trajectories. In these cases, other published international reports and data were utilized 
and average established. This information is likely to be further updated and verified through the 
next GHG inventory report and the ongoing first Biannual Update report project. 
The Adaptation component of the NDC was informed by recently conducted study on adaptation 
baseline covering key vulnerable sectors of the economy. The priorities builds on the National 
Adaptation Plan of Action( 2013), federal sectors plans and priorities as well as Federal member 
states priorities informed by the consultation processes for the NDC. The country is will further 
refine the adaptation priorities in the ongoing NAP process under the GCF Funded NAP 
Readiness Project implemented through the UNDP.  
 
3.0 
National Policies and institutional Frameworks 
2.1 Policy and legal Frameworks  
With recently found stability, Somalia has made progress in the development of policies and 
institutional frameworks relevant to climate change, Natural Resource Management and overall 
National development. The existence of policies and regulatory frameworks are steps in the right 
direction although implementation challenges still exist at both the Federal and State levels. 
These Nation policies, plans and strategies have set the foundation for the preparation of 
Somalia’s revised NDC. 
 
 
National Policy Documents 
Year 
1.  The Ninth National Development Plan  
2020-2024 
2.  The Somalia National Climate Change Policy  
2020 
3.  The Power Master Plan for Somalia 
2019 
4.  The National Adaptation Programme of Actions 
2013 
5.  The National Environment Policy  
2019 
6.  Draft National Environmental Management Bill 
2020 
7.  Draft Environmental Social Impact Assessment Regulations 
2020 
8.  Somali National Disaster Management Policy 
2018  
9.  Integrated Water Resources Management Strategic Plan  
2019-2023 
10.  Recovery and Resilience Framework  
2018 
11.  The Initial National Communication to UNFCCC 
2018 
12.  The National Electricity Bill 
2019 
13.  National Energy policy 2018  
2018  
14.  National Voluntary Land Degradation Neutrality Targets 2020 
2020 
15.  The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
2015 
16.  Somalia National Water Policy and National Water Resource Law 
2019 
17.  National Food Security and Nutrition Policy 
2020 
18.  National Fertiliser Policy  
2019
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
 
4 
 
19.  The UN Strategic Framework Somalia  
2020 
20.  National Drought Plan 
2020 
21.  National Water Resource Strategy 2021 -2025 
2021 
22.  National Pesticide Policy 
2019 
23.  Somalia National Action Programme for the UN Convention to Combat 
Desertification 
2016 
24.  National Voluntary Land Degradation Neutrality Targets 
2020 
25.  National Capacity Assessment Towards Implementing the 
Environmental Treaties of the Rio Convention 
2017 
  
 
2.2 Institutional Arrangements  
The National Climate Change Policy, 2020 recently approved by Somalia Cabinet provides for 
the institutional arrangements for climate change. Some of these institutions are yet to be fully 
operationalized. The main entities established by the policy include:  
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change(DoECC)- The office situated in the Office of 
the Prime Minister has the mandate of formulation of federal level climate policies, coordination 
of activities by federal institutions, Federal Member States, local governments, international 
partners, and other stakeholders in the climate change. The office also serves as UNFCCC 
National Focal point and the National Designated Authority(NDA) for Green Climate Fund.  
National Climate Change Committee (NCCC) - The NCCC has the mandate for coordinating 
and supervising the implementation of the climate change policy. The NCCC is a multi-
stakeholder, high level policy coordination committee and is responsible for the overall 
coordination and supervision of climate change activities in Somalia. It comprises the Prime 
Minister (or his designate), DG of the Directorate of Environment & Climate Change, Sectoral 
Ministries, Directors of Governmental Agencies, Member States’ Ministers for Environment, the 
private sector and civil society organizations.  
Cross-Sectoral Committee on Climate Change (CSCC) – The CSCC brings together the 
officials from across government working on climate change; for information exchange, 
consultation, agreement and support among the spheres of government regarding climate change 
and government’s response to climate change. It will be chaired by the DG of the Directorate of 
Environment & Climate Change. Representatives could be at DG levels. The primary roles of the 
CSCCC are as follows: a) Serve as a cross-sector forum for the exchange of ideas, including the 
provision of updates on ongoing and planned climate change initiatives. b) Coordinate and advise 
sector-specific and cross-sector implementation of activities, and advise on monitoring and 
evaluation outcomes as well as future directions of the NCCP; and c) Address the cross-cutting 
and social aspects of climate change.  
Key stakeholders in climate change planning and implementation in Somalia recognized by the 
policy include: Federal Sectoral Ministries Federal Member State Governments, Civil Society 
Organizations and private sector.
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
 
5 
 
A comprehensive analysis of the state of the country’s climate change institutions during the NDC 
updating process revealed structural and systemic weaknesses in the institutional bedrock. This 
include lack the necessary capacity to address climate change and its associated challenges, 
financial weaknesses, the dearth of appropriate policies and inability to enforce laws. Moreover, 
most of the institutions suffer from a considerable deficiency in human, financial, organizational, 
and institutional capacity to manage the environment and natural resources and respond to the 
specific challenges that climate change brought to Somalia. 
 
4.0 
Somalia’s Contribution to addressing climate change  
Somalia’s update NDC comprises of both mitigation and adaptation components. Overall, the 
country’s priority remains sustainable development and poverty eradication while sustaining 
stability and peace  and building resilience to climate change impacts. Key principles guiding 
Somalia’s NDC process include: Country-driveness, linkages with National development and 
peace building efforts, maximizing co-benefits, gender-responsiveness, conflict-sensitive, 
participatory, inclusive and transparent, Guided by the best available scientific information 
including traditional and Indigenous knowledge and coordination. To achieve effective 
implementation of the NDC, Somalia will continue to enhance the relevant policy and institutional 
frameworks while taking into consideration critical principles such as National Development plans, 
Sustainable development and gender mainstreaming. 
4.1 
Mitigation contribution 
Somalia’s current GHG emissions are relatively low estimated at 53.70 MtCO2eq, representing 
less than 0.03 percent of total global emissions. The Agriculture, Forestry, and Land-use sectors 
are the major contributors to its emissions. As the country realizes its development aspirations, 
pursue stability and prosperity, with a growing population (estimated at 2.8% per annum growth) 
and economy with urbanization will mean increases in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The 
emissions under Business as Usual scenario are expected to almost double to over 107.40 
MtCO2eq in 2030, with significant emissions expected from AFOLU and energy sectors. Other 
sectors with emissions growth include transport and waste. The GHG emissions and projections 
will be updated through the ongoing Biannual Update report(BUR) project. The resultant BAU 
growth will mean environmental and social conditions, including increased competition over 
resources, could intensify vulnerability to climate risks. Transitioning to low emissions, climate-
resilient development will address future risks, thereby improving Somalia’s ability to prosper 
under a changing climate while reducing the emissions intensity of a growing economy.  
Somalia is thus committed to pursuing a low emission sustainable development pathway. Under 
the updated NDC, Somalia has set a target of achieving 30% emissions reductions against the 
Business As Usual (BAU) scenario estimate of  107.39 MtCO2eq by 2030. To achieve this target, 
Somalia will aim to reduce and avoid its GHG emissions by about 32.40MtCO2eq relative to the 
BAU scenario by 2030. The updated contributions are in line with Somalia’s National Planning 
processes, strategies and actions in the energy, agriculture, forestry, transport and Waste sectors.
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
 
6 
 
The country The overall costs of the mitigation actions for the NDC period is estimated at USD 
6.96 Billion. The proposed actions and estimated emissions reductions are elaborated below: 
No 
Sector priorities and targets  
Estimated 
projected BAU 
emissions from the 
sector in 2030 (Mt 
CO2eq 
Emissions 
reductions as 
per the NDC 
target (Mt 
CO2eq) 
Costs/investment 
(USD million) for 
NDC period  
1. Agriculture Sector 
• 
Implement Agroforestry 
practices  
• 
Rangeland restoration and 
rehabilitation  
• 
Implement Sustainable Land 
Management including climate 
smart agriculture practices   
41.12 
5.88 
600 
2. Energy Sector 
• 
Development of renewable 
energy electricity (Solar and 
Wind)  including people centred 
decentralised solutions 
• 
Promotion of clean and energy 
efficient cooking 
• 
Promotion of distributed 
renewable lamps  
• 
Promotion of use of energy 
efficient light bulbs  
• 
Promote energy efficiency in 
electricity transmission  
10.30 
6.0 
1,290 
 
 
3. Forestry  Sector  
• 
Afforestation and Reforestation 
of Degraded Forests including 
mangroves restoration 
• 
Promote programmes aimed at 
reducing emissions from 
deforestation and forest 
degradation including through 
REDD+ readiness activities  
and implementing charcoal 
policy 
50.65 
18.10  
3,850  
4. Transport Sector 
• 
Improvement of road conditions 
through investments in road 
infrastructure  
• 
Improved vehicle stock 
efficiency including for the three 
wheeled Tuk-tuks  
2.5 
1.40 
1,170 
5 
Waste Sector 
• 
Development of 2 sanitary land 
fills 
2.82 
0.28  
50 
 
Total  
107.39 
31.66 
6,960
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
 
7 
 
 
4.1.1 Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding 
The table below provides further details about the country’s mitigation contributions as guided 
by UNFCCC decisions:  
Key issue 
Information on the Somalia to provide clarity, transparency and 
understanding 
Base 
Year 
and 
Implementation 
Period 
The base year for Somalia NDC is 2015, and the timeframe for implementing 
mitigation and adaptation actions is 2021 to 2030.  
Mitigation target 
Somalia committed to reduce and avoid its emissions 30% by 2030 compared 
to BAU scenario (107.40MtCO2eq in 2030). The emissions reduction targets 
reflect introduce policies, programs and technologies that drive the country to 
low emissions development pathway. Due to the unique national 
circumstances, the implementation of the mitigation target will require 
international public and private support including in the form of finance, 
investments, technology development & transfer and capacity building 
Scope 
of 
gases 
included 
in 
the 
contribution 
Gases covered in this updated NDC are CO2, CH4 and NO2. Other gases were 
not taken into account, considering that their use and associated emissions are 
extremely low. Sectors and GHG emissions reported within this document cover 
99.9% of national emissions. 
Sectors covered 
The emission reduction focuses on three broad sectors namely (1) AFOLU 
sector emissions through sustainable reduction of deforestation, land 
degradation, afforestation and reforestation, and national REDD+ strategy (2) 
Energy sector (electricity, transport, and household emissions) and (3) Solid 
waste disposal on land. 
BAU emissions 
projections and 
assumptions 
Both the population and economy of Somalia is on the rise and this growth will 
have significant implications for future emissions. Following a review of 2015-
2028 GDP data and formal population projections, the BAU were developed as 
part of the development of this updated NDC. The scenario assumes an 
economic growth at 4.9% and the population growth of three percent per year 
by 2030. Emissions are expected to increase in the forecasted maximum growth 
scenario, with economic growth of 7.5% by 2028. The BAU scenario also 
assumes that Somalia could exploit its massive untapped fossil fuels 
reserves(particularly oil and gas). 
Mitigation co-benefits 
resulting from 
adaptation actions 
Mitigation co-benefits associated with adaptation actions will be included. Some 
of the adaptation actions with the greatest mitigation co-benefit potential include 
the 
following: 
rangeland 
restoration, 
sustainable 
land 
management, 
agroforestry, 
reafforestation, 
clean 
energy 
investments, 
infrastructure 
development among others 
How 
Somalia 
considers its updated 
NDC contribution is 
fair and ambitious, in 
light of its national 
circumstances 
Somalia is one of the world’s least developed countries with poverty and conflict 
situations exacerbated by climate change. The country believes that, although 
its contribution to climate change has always been marginal, global efforts to 
reduce GHGs emissions will need to be differentiated based on a Party’s 
ecological 
footprint, 
historical 
responsibility, 
development 
capacity, 
technological capacity and population. Based on the country’s national 
circumstances, this NDC is fair and ambitious.  
Somalia considers its updated NDC contribution is ambitious since it 
establishes an overall national vision for low emissions and climate resilient
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
 
8 
 
development. The revised NDC goes beyond the pervious projects based NDC 
target to broad and quantified target for the period. This NDC is informed by 
technical mitigation and adaptation analysis and is comprehensive covering all 
key mitigation sectors. The country is also committing to establishing robust 
monitoring and verification system to support the implementation of the NDC. 
Carbon offsets 
Somalia shall not exclude the role of international market mechanisms to 
achieve its conditional 2030 targets, subject to the use of robust systems that 
enable real and verified emission reductions. The country expects that some 
investments in low-carbon, climate resilient infrastructure and some 
development options in its NDC can be funded in whole or in part through credit 
transfers /International carbon asset(s). 
Methodological 
approach 
The NDC was prepared in a consultative and inclusive manner. The NDC 
revision process was guided by technical mitigation analysis report. Broad 
based national and sub-national stakeholders’ consultative meetings were held 
during the process. The consultations brought together government institutions 
both national and sub-national levels, civil society organizations, academic and 
research institutions, the private sector across the country. National policies, 
legislations, strategies, programmes and action plans together with UNFCCC 
decisions guided the updating process of the NDC. Priority sectors on both 
adaptation and mitigation were identified through a review of various climate 
change, social, environmental and economic development benefits and their 
feasibility. 
Information 
on 
the 
circumstances under 
which the Party may 
update the values of 
the 
reference 
indicators  
The National GHG emissions may be updated with more country specific 
information and methodological improvements, including under the first BUR 
and second National communications 
Quality Control and 
Assurance 
To ensure the NDC quality compliance, the UNDP Climate Promise Quality 
Assurance Checklist has been applied. In additional national and international 
technical experts consulted on an ongoing basis throughout the updating 
process. The draft final report has also been subject to a technical peer review 
to verify the process and results. 
Accounting and 
verification system 
A measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system will be established 
and the technical capacity, research and coordination of stakeholders will be 
enhanced. The achievement will be tracked on a biennial basis and reported as 
part of enhanced transparency framework under the Paris Agreement  
Institutional 
arrangement and 
Implementation 
process 
The implementation of the NDC will be undertake by both state and non-state 
actors in Somalia. Directorate of Environment and Climate Change(DoECC) at 
the Office of the Prime Minister of the Federal republic of Somalia  is the main 
institution responsible for promoting implementation and coordination of the 
NDC in close collaboration with other ministries and stakeholders at federal and 
member states level. Capacity building, development of strategies, supportive 
mechanisms, monitoring and public awareness and participation for the NDC 
implementation will be undertaken by the DoECC with support from partners. 
Monitoring-Evaluation 
(M&E) a 
The Federal Government of Somalia, through the DoECC has the full 
responsibility to monitor and evaluate through regular stakeholders’ consultative 
engagement. This will ensure the effective coordination, resource mobilisation 
and implementation of NDC target. Monitoring and evaluation of the Mitigation
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
 
9 
 
and adaptation actions/projects will be harmonized. Inconsistent data and 
systems will be synchronized across sectors of national and subnational 
institutions. This would provide a holistic view of the overall status of projects 
and outcomes/outputs. Furthermore, updated information and data analysis 
through the revised GHG inventory and first Biannual update report will inform 
the target. 
 
4.2 Adaptation Contribution  
As a highly vulnerable country, adaptation and building resilience to climate change is the 
country’s highest priority. Through the adaptation contribution of the NDC, Somalia aims to 
enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change 
through mainstreaming climate adaptation to into sustainable development.The priority areas for 
climate change adaptation in Somalia from 2021 to 2030 are informed by its 2020 adaptation 
baseline assessment and based on Somalia's national and sub-national adaptation plans and 
policies, including NAPA, which provides a climate change adaptation strategy and a climate 
change risk mitigation plan. The country has initiated its NAP process and has starting 
implementing a GCF funded NAP readiness project to enhance its capacity, establish legal and 
institutional frameworks and further define its medium term and long-term adaptation actions in 
priority sectors. The NAP will be the main guiding instrument to implement the country’s 
adaptation priorities.  
Somalia’s NDC estimates the cost of implementing the adaptation components of the NDC target 
at USD 55.5 Billion for the 10 years. This translates to financial resources needed for 
implementation of the identified adaptation contributions is about USD 5.55 billion per annum from 
2021- 2030. It is important to note some of adaptation actions have mitigation co-benefits. The 
table below indicates the proposed adaptation actions and estimated costs: 
4.2.1 Adaptation actions and estimated cost 
# 
Adaptation sectors/proposed actions  
Estimated 
investment 
required (in USD, 
2021-2030) 
1.  
Agriculture and Food security: 
• 
Establish agricultural institutions to research drought resistant varieties 
• 
Provision of seeds and seedlings that are drought resistant to farming 
community  
• 
Developing irrigation systems including dams, channel & water 
reticulation system  
• 
Improving and establishing marketing systems & infrastructure eg 
cooperatives, cooling systems for perishable goods 
• 
Building marketing facilities  and infrastructure for crops and livestock 
urban centres  
• 
Support SMEs to promote value addition of the crop and livestock 
products eg cooling facilities  
• 
Promote weather based insurance scheme for farmers and pastoralists 
• 
Investment in veterinary services to address climate related diseases  
$10 billion
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
 
10 
 
• 
Establishment of disease free zones to enhance quality for export of 
livestock products 
• 
Build adaptation capacity in climate-resilient agronomic practices for 
smallholder farmers 
• 
Improve animal productivity and animal breeds to increase resilience to 
climate change 
• 
Manage the grazing areas, and rangelands in a sustainable manner and 
enhancing the development of livestock infrastructures and services 
including feed storage 
• 
Improve access to agro-weather information services 
2.  
Water resources management and public health  
• 
Assessment of the water system  
• 
Water conservation and management – institutional arrangements 
enhanced  
• 
Establish and maintain strategic water reserves mega-dams, shallow 
wells to capture runoffs 
• 
Develop solar powered boreholes  
• 
Invest in basic and portable water supply households for households 
• 
Construct and operationalise water pans  
• 
Promote rainwater harvesting and conservation of water, including 
improved water use efficiency 
• 
Development of drainage and storm water systems in urban centres 
especially Mogadishu, Baladweyne, Jowhar and Kismayu 
• 
Implement integrated Water resources Management strategy 
• 
Public health awareness campaign, targeting rural areas on climate 
change effects and public health related issues 
• 
Establish and operationalise public health facilities in rural areas 
$15 billion 
3.  
Disaster preparedness and management 
• 
Establish effective early warning systems and disaster risk 
management policies to improve resilience to extreme weather events 
• 
Establish he meteorological networks to enhance early warning 
systems 
• 
Increase resilience of communities, infrastructures and ecosystems to 
droughts and floods 
• 
Enhanced coordination and information-sharing between relevant 
ministries and stakeholders  
• 
Establishing disaster response for the country including facilities, 
settlements for IDPs 
• 
Strengthen the adaptive capacity of the most vulnerable groups 
including women, children, elderly persons and IDPS communities 
through social safety nets 
• 
Livelihood support for the vulnerable groups  
$10 Billion 
4.  
Coastal, marine environment and fisheries 
• 
Develop and implement coastal zone policy, strategy and management 
plan;  
• 
Improve capacity for fisher folks in terms of equipment, nets and bots  
• 
Supporting private sector establish cooling systems for coast areas 
including appropriate equipment for transportation 
• 
Value addition investments for fisheries resources  
• 
Enhance the resilience of the fisheries value chains by promoting 
climate-smart fisheries development  
• 
Promote livelihood diversification for coastal communities.  
$3 Billion
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
 
11 
 
• 
Improve monitoring and early warning systems of both sea-level rise 
impacts and extreme weather events for building adaptive capacity. 
• 
Mangrove & shoreline restoration program. 
• 
Strengthen key fisheries management services for sound development 
and management of the fishery sector for resilience creation 
5.  
Energy  
• 
Enhance energy investments to adopt diversified adaptive 
energy technologies for sustained livelihoods  
• 
Develop national grid systems and increase the generation 
capacity to address the energy poverty 
• 
Increase in production of non-forest biomass fuel briquettes, e.g. 
from agricultural waste, sawdust, and human waste, with 
emphasis on women and the youth 
• 
Improved kilns, jikos 
• 
Integrate climate change adaptation in energy investments and 
infrastructure 
• 
Develop and adopt policy and legislative frameworks to promote 
clean energy solutions 
$5 billion 
6.  
Forestry and Environment  
• 
Increase in areas under agroforestry and reforestation of 
degraded forests 
• 
Enhance the participation of women and youth in activities related to 
adaptation and environmental conservation in order to empower them 
and enhance their adaptive capacity 
• 
Promote climate change resilient traditional and modern knowledge of 
sustainable pasture and range management systems 
• 
Climate change communication, education and public awareness 
raising 
$300million 
7.  
Human settlements 
• 
Promote green and climate resilient building industry  
• 
Enhance awareness on the impacts of climate change in the context 
of human settlements promoting sustainable land management 
systems and climate sensitive human settlement developments. 
• 
Facilitate provision of, and access to adequate, affordable and 
climate sensitive shelter to vulnerable groups including IDPS. 
$200 million 
8.  
Infrastructure including roads, bridges 
• 
Climate 
proof 
infrastructure 
developments 
including 
infrastructure 
• 
Establish road infrastructure networks and drainage systems. 
• 
Strengthen climate robustness of public and commercial sector 
buildings 
• 
Maintain and upgrade roads and other infrastructure with appropriate 
drainage systems to cope with flooding     
$5Billion 
 
Total  
$48.5 Billion
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
 
12 
 
4.4 Gender Mainstreaming 
Somalia remains one of the most unequal countries with the Gender Index standing at 0.776(1 – 
complete inequality) placing Somalia at the fourth-highest position globally. Climate Change has 
exacerbated gender inequality in Somalia, with women and children affected more by climate 
change effects due to lack of access and control of critical resources, biased labor division and 
absence from decision making processes from household to the National level. For example, 
reports indicate that 70-80% of those in IDPs and refugee camps are women, who are exposed 
to gender based violence.4 On the other hand, women and youth can act as agents of change 
and  play a key role in supporting the transition towards low emissions and climate resilient 
development in Somalia. There are critical gender issues across sectors and hence the promotion 
of gender equality is critical for effective climate adaptation and mitigation in Somalia. The country 
needs to be supported to undertake comprehensive and in-depth gender analysis to inform 
gender integration across climate adaptation and mitigation sectors. There is a need to build 
capacities of key stakeholders at all levels including decision-makers on mainstreaming gender 
in climate actions. 
5.0 
Means of Implementation for both Adaptation and Mitigation Actions 
The estimated cost of implementing Somalia’s NDC is approximately USD 55.5 billion for the 
period 2021- 2030. The Federal government of Somalia will strive to mainstream the NDC actions 
into the national development planning and budgeting processes. As an LDC country with unique 
national circumstances, the Government of Somalia does not have the fiscal capacity to mobilize 
financial resources for the implementation of the NDC actions.  
 
The successful implementation of both adaptation and mitigation actions thus, require provisions 
of adequate and predictable financial resources, transfer of environmentally sound technologies 
and capacity building support. Financial support through multilateral and bilateral channels and 
sources will be critical to facilitate transparent and successful implementation of the NDC. The 
private sector is already involved in climate mitigation and adaptation interventions in the forestry, 
energy, waste, water, transport and disaster risk response among others. There is need for focus 
strategic efforts and engagements with private sector in order to leverage the potential of these 
entities to support a more resilient and green Somalia. 
 
Similarly, there is a need for enhanced capacity building of various institutions and strengthening 
policy and legislative frameworks to support Somalia enhance its adaptive capacities to climate 
change. In particular, the country requires support to enhance capacities to access multilateral 
and bilateral climate finance sources, address barriers and enhance private sector investments 
and establish effective institutional mechanisms to enhance mobilization and effective utilization 
of climate finance. The country will require support to establish national MRV system and 
strengthen its institutional set-up with adequate infrastructure and human resources to track 
climate actions.  
 
4 UNDP, 2014, Gender in Somalia Policy brief
