=== PAGE 1 ===
Digging for Data
Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or 
Enabling Factor for Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia
SOMALIA: ECONOMICS OF WATER SUMMARY REPORT
=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===
Digging for Data
Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or 
Enabling Factor for Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia
A summary report, along with a suite of six reports, 
accompanying the ‘Somalia: Economics of Water’ Report
By: Chantal Richey, Philip Schuler, and Shyam K.C.
=== PAGE 4 ===
© 2021 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 
1818 H Street NW 
Washington DC 20433 
Telephone: 202-473-1000 
Internet: www.worldbank.org 
This work is a product of the staff of the World Bank with external consultants. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions 
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the 
governments they represent. 
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, 
and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning 
the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. 
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this 
work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World 
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Cover photograph: Collecting water in Dhoobleey, Lower Jubba. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed Mohamed Hassan, Director of 
Hydrometeorology Department, Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Federal Government of Somalia)
Administrative support: Joy Mildred Adhiambo Mboya and Meseret Tsegaw Chekole
Editorial support and design: Anjali Dar Sengupta
=== PAGE 5 ===
Abbreviations and Acronyms........................................................................................................................iv
Acknowledgments................................................................................................................................................v
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................................vi
Introduction........................................................................................................................................................... 9
1	 What are Somalia’s Water Resources? How are They Changing?......................................10
2	 How Water is Used in Somalia and How This is Changing.....................................................14
3	 How is Water Managed and Governed?........................................................................................... 21
4	 What are the Investment Needs and Options?...........................................................................28
5	 Recommendations Summary................................................................................................................31
Bibliography........................................................................................................................................................ 40
Contents
=== PAGE 6 ===
iv
Abbreviations and Acronyms
	
AF	 Additional Financing (World Bank)
	
AfDB	 African Development Bank
	
BRA	 Benadir Regional Administration
	
CAPEX	 Capital Expenditure
	
ENSO	 El Niño Southern Oscillation
	
ET	 Evapotranspiration
	
FAO	 Food and Agriculture Organization
	 FAOSTAT	 Food and Agriculture Organization 
	
	 Corporate Statistical Database
	
FCV	 Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
	
FSNAU	 Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit
	
FGS	 Federal Government of Somalia
	
FMS	 Federal Member State
	
GDP	 Gross Domestic Product
	
ha	 Hectare
	
IDP	 Internally Displaced Person
	
IMF	 International Monetary Fund
	
INGO	 International Nongovernmental Organization
	
km	 Kilometer
	
km2	 Square Kilometer
	
l/cap/day	 Liter Per Capita Per Day
	
l/s/km2	 Liter Per Second Per Square Kilometer
	
lcd	 Liter Per Capita Per Day
	
m3	 Cubic Meter
	 m3/ha/year	 Cubic Meter Per Hectare Per Year
	
MCM	 Million Cubic Meter
	
MCM/yr	 Million Cubic Meter Per Year
	 microS/cm	 Micro Siemens Per Centimeter
	
mm/d	 Millimeter Per Day
	
mm/yr	 Millimeter Per Year
	
MoEWR	 Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
	
MoWD	 Ministry of Water Development
	
NDP	 National Development Plan
	
NGO	 Nongovernmental Organization
	
NWRS	 National Water Resource 
	
	 Development Strategy
	
ODA	 Official Development Assistance
	
OPEX	 Operational Expenditure
	
PET	 Potential Evapotranspiration
	
PPP	 Public-Private Partnership
	
SWC	 Soil and Water Conservation
	
SRTM	 Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
	
SWALIM	 Somalia Water and Land Information 	
	
	 Management (FAO)
	
ToR	 Terms of Reference
	
UNICEF	 United Nations Children’s Fund
	
WALP	 World Bank-funded Water for 
	
	 Agro-Pastoralist Livelihood Pilot in Somalia
	
WASH	 Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
	
WaPOR	 Water Productivity Open-Access Portal
	
	 (FAO)
	
WB	 World Bank
	
WBG	 World Bank Group
	
WDA	 Somali Water Development Agency
	
WDS	 Water Delivery System
	
WFP	 World Food Programme
	
WHO	 World Health Organization
	
WSC	 Water and Soil Conservation
=== PAGE 7 ===
v
T
his report has been developed and written through a participatory process involving a team of World Bank 
staff comprising Chantal Richey (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist), Philip Schuler (Lead Economist), 
and Shyam K.C. (Senior Water Resource Management Specialist) under the guidance of Catherine Signe Tovey 
(Practice Manager). The team was supported by consultants: Kerstin Danert, Gonzalo Delacámara, Leslie Joy 
Alex, Albert Tuinhof, Jacobus Groen, and Klas Sandström. Nitin Jain provided valuable guidance in the initial 
stages of the report development. The report benefitted from initial work undertaken in a first phase in early 2020, 
‘Somalia: Economics of Water Phase One’.
We also thank our colleagues and partners who have provided photographs to enrich the text in this report.
The views and opinions expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not reflect the position of the 
World Bank or those of the executive directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. 
Anjali Dar Sengupta provided editorial and design support. Thanks are also due to Meseret Tsegaw Chekole 
and Joy Mildred Adhiambo Mboya for providing team assistant support.
Acknowledgments
=== PAGE 8 ===
vi
W
ater insecurity in Somalia continues to 
impact the lives of millions, inhibiting 
economic and human development. 
This report ‘Digging for Data: Towards Understand­
ing Water as a Limiting or Enabling Factor for Socio­
economic Growth in Somalia’, proposes ways to avert 
future crises by introducing untapped opportunities 
within the country. Six key messages emerged during 
the study.
Data are scarce. The report’s title was chosen 
as ‘Digging for Data’ because finding data on water 
in Somalia is almost as hard as digging for water in 
arid lands. Data are extremely limited, and whilst this 
study evolved to producing and analyzing far more 
data than was ever imagined, it also highlighted the 
need for ongoing studies. 
A suite of technical studies was produced: a full 
Synthesis Report, a Groundwater Assessment and 
a Groundwater Quality Note, a Surface Water and 
Riverine Assessment, an Institutional Analysis and 
a Water Sectoral Analysis. They offer comprehen­
sive water data for Somalia and can be downloaded 
from: the World Bank’s Water Global Practice web­
site (https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water); the 
Bank’s Somalia website (https://www.worldbank.org/
en/country/somalia); and, in 2022, from the Ministry 
of Energy and Water Resources’ (MoEWR) website 
(https://moewr.gov.so), currently under construction.
Is Somalia a water-scarce country? Not exactly, 
and the situation is not as hopeless as one would 
imagine. Analysis of water availability and expected 
use in 2030 at a national level shows that, except for 
the Benadir region, long-term renewable groundwater 
and surface runoff resources will be sufficient to meet 
water demands (human, livestock, and agriculture) 
without significantly affecting environmental flows—
provided water is allocated to the most productive 
needs and managed efficiently. This is particularly 
important to overcome localized acute water scarcity 
at the district level and chronic vulnerability to vari­
able rainfall at the community and household level, 
negatively affecting people’s health, education, and 
long-term human development outcomes, particularly 
for women and vulnerable groups. 
Water insecurity creates economic and human 
development challenges through complex, mul­
tiple pathways (see figure on page viii). Water in­
security in Somalia, including exposure to ever more 
frequent floods and droughts, is amplified by envi­
ronmental degradation and climate change, both of 
which can make rainfall more erratic, while reducing 
the ability of watersheds to naturally store, treat, and 
slowly release water for productive use and human 
consumption. The challenges of achieving Water for 
All has been further exacerbated by the global eco­
nomic fall-out of COVID-19, resulting in poor macro­
Executive Summary
=== PAGE 9 ===
vii
economic performance which has led to low domestic 
revenue collection, capital expenditure, and compet­
ing sectoral priorities in turn reducing water sector 
spending. Sector financing constraints, combined 
with rapidly growing needs fueled by forced displace­
ment and urbanization, further strain the state’s ability 
to maintain inclusive and sustainable water services, 
amplifying social and gender inequalities. Breaking 
this cycle means building resilience to economic and 
climatic shocks through a more diverse and dynamic 
urban economy and a more secure rural economy, 
both of which need to be underpinned by affordable, 
inclusive, and reliable water services, itself a key pil­
lar for improving human capital development.
Investing in water generates high returns. 
Based on an analysis of recent rural water sector 
projects in Somalia, this study highlights how US$1 
million invested in rural water infrastructure and liveli­
hood development activities is estimated to generate 
a discounted return of US$5.85 million under base­
line assumptions.1 This study sets out a broad suite of 
potential investments for the short and medium terms 
for rural, peri-urban, and urban areas which would 
strengthen resilience at local levels, transform liveli­
hoods and the economy, and enhance the availability 
of data, information, and knowledge on water and its 
links to Somalia’s economy and social development. 
Reinvent the riverine breadbasket through 
farmer-led irrigation. Much recent discussion has 
revolved around the demise of the Jubba and Sha­
belle riverine areas’ irrigation infrastructure which, in 
years gone by, provided the water for Somalia’s ag­
ricultural hub. Multiple reports and strategies discuss 
the need to rehabilitate the aged and dilapidated in­
frastructure. This study suggests a different path and 
proposes that, whilst rehabilitation of existing infra­
structure is viable in the long term, the quicker, and 
cheaper, method of farmer-led irrigation development 
should be embraced in the short to medium term. 
Where water sources are available nearby, farmer-
led irrigation costs one-fourth as much on average as 
traditional irrigation and it is far easier to implement. 
Understanding urban water supply and sani­
tation is an urgent analytical priority. The study 
found that the rural water sector is well understood 
and supported, and existing projects are scalable 
without much modification. The same cannot be said 
for urban water supply and sanitation, however. In 
the short term, analytical work should focus on un­
derstanding water and sanitation service delivery to 
households and firms in urban areas, unpacking the 
roles of emerging water utilities, and determining ap­
propriate governance mechanisms. This will help pro­
vide services for growing urbanization and contribute 
to bridging gaps between rural and urban economies.
The final section of the study concludes with head­
line recommendations and detailed projects for con­
sideration in the short and medium term. The study 
suggests that all water sector investments should be 
prioritized based on the twin objectives of (a) their 
potential to improve long-term water availability as 
a critical contribution to water security and climate 
change adaptation; and (b) the extent to which they 
contribute towards wider socioeconomic develop­
ment, reducing inequalities, and creating economic 
and human development opportunities.
In July 2021, the Federal Government of Soma­
lia published the National Water Resources Strategy 
(NWRS). A primary recommendation emerging from 
this study relates to the institutional arrangements in 
the water sector and it is an immediate foundational 
necessity for water governance to be underpinned 
by policy and legislative instruments. The NWRS in­
cludes a roadmap of flagship projects, and the con­
cluding section and tables in this report align to those.
Executive Summary
1. Somalia Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience 
Project Economic Analysis.
=== PAGE 10 ===
viii
Headline Messages
Climate-Environment 
Vulnerability
Water security challenges are amplified by 
environmental degradation and climate change. 
Recurrent episodes of droughts and floods result 
in consecutive cycles of economic shock and 
recovery.
Poor Macroeconomic 
Performance
Environmental and climate shocks, 
import bans, and the global economic 
fall-out of the COVID-19 pandemic 
have resulted in a sluggish real GDP 
per capita growth for Somalia. This 
has been further dampened by the 
recent downward trend in foreign direct 
investments.
Reduced Water Sector 
Spending
Minuscule domestic revenue collection 
and capital expenditure, coupled with competing 
sectoral priorities, has resulted in Somalia’s 
water sector generally allocated only a small 
share of domestic revenue.
Increase in Inequality 
Inadequate water security increases 
inequality in the country and, subsequently, 
the vulnerability of certain social groups.
Human Capital 
Impacts
The lack of access to improved water supplies 
has long-term impacts on Somalia’s human capital 
across generations, affecting the health, skills, and 
knowledge of its citizens. Expanding access to 
improved water sources also has the potential to 
increase women’s participation in education and in 
the labor market.
Secure Rural 
Economy
Efforts to diversify and strengthen 
the urban economy may not achieve 
their intended impacts if they are not 
complemented by measures to secure 
the rural economy against long term 
environmental degradation and future 
economic and climatic shocks.
Need to Diversify 
Urban Economy
Somalia’s urban populations would benefit from 
economic diversification. Urban investments could 
generate large economic returns due to economies 
of scale and scope.
Forced Displacement + 
Rapid Urbanization
Forced displacement of rural populations as a result of economic and 
climatic shocks and environmental degradation is one of Somalia’s 
most prominent challenges.
01
04
02
03
07
06
08
05
Executive Summary
=== PAGE 11 ===
9
T
he report presents a high-level summary of 
research findings and policy recommenda­
tions from the ‘Somalia Economics of Water: 
Digging for Data’ study. The study’s objective was to 
analyze key pathways through which the availability, 
or lack, of water services can impact economic out­
comes, resilience, and fragility in Somalia. 
Three research questions were formulated: 
•	 How much are water resources availability and 
quality of access to water services limiting factors 
for human and economic development in Somalia?
•	 What are the socioeconomic impacts of underin­
vestment as per consumptive water uses (with em­
phasis on water services for rural and urban areas 
and water for livestock and agriculture)?
•	 How could water be better harnessed in the future?
The ‘Somalia Economics of Water’ study was car­
ried out under the Somalia Water Platform Program, 
which is managed by the World Bank Water Global 
Practice and financed by the Global Water and Sani­
tation Program. The Platform was launched in 2019 
to provide a mechanism for dialogue and coordina­
tion on the water agenda with the World Bank Global 
Practices, thereby informing the World Bank on wa­
ter-related engagements. Initial outputs of the Water 
Platform in Somalia included: (a) a sector note identi­
fying challenges and opportunities for engagement in 
the sector; (b) service delivery model development as 
the water sector attempts to graduate from humani­
tarian responses to country-led development; and 
(c) a first analysis on the aspects of water economics 
in Somalia. The study produced a full Synthesis Re­
port, ‘The Economics of Water: Digging for Data: To­
wards Understanding Water as a Limiting or Enabling 
Factor for Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia’, and a 
suite of complementing technical reports including a 
Groundwater Assessment and Groundwater Quality 
Note, a Surface Water and Riverine Assessment, an 
Institutional Analysis, and a full Water Sector Analy­
sis. The full Synthesis Report and suite of technical 
studies are available on: the Ministry of Energy and 
Water Resources’ (MoEWR) website (https://moewr.
gov.so); the World Bank’s Water Global Practice 
website (https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water); 
and the World Bank’s Somalia website (https://www.
worldbank.org/en/country/somalia).
This summary report is organized as follows. Sec­
tion 1 describes Somalia’s water resources and how 
they are changing. Section 2 describes water us­
age in Somalia—both currently and expected future 
demand. Somalia’s complex and unique institutional 
framework for managing water resources and provid­
ing water to users are discussed in Section 3. Based 
on the study’s analysis of available resources and fu­
ture demand, Section 4 lists a range of potential op­
tions for investing in water supply and management. 
The summary concludes with recommendations for 
investments, policy reforms, and additional research.
Introduction
=== PAGE 12 ===
10
T
his section discusses Somalia’s water re­
sources and analyzes how they are chang­
ing with time. It further answers the question: 
Is Somalia a water scarce country or not? Ground­
water is the primary source of water in Somalia and 
although sufficient water is available, on average, 
across the entire country, water quality is often low. 
The main groundwater quality issues are salinity, 
fluoride, and bacteriological contamination. Salin­
ity affects both the use of water for drinking and for 
agriculture (Said 2021) while bacteriological contami­
nation primarily affects the safe use of water for hu­
man consumption; even though there are not many 
systematic surveys, the studies that do exist report 
the problem of bacteriological contamination of dug 
wells, berkads, and hafirs (Berger 1985; EarthWater 
1998; van Haren et al. 2017; WASH cluster Somalia 
2017). Generally, there is significant spatial variation 
in terms of water resources, and one finds water scar­
cities when analyzing supply at the district and com­
munity level. There is large temporal variation due to 
seasonality, weather shocks, and long-term climate 
change.
1.1 Ground and Surface Water Sources
The total freshwater resources available in Soma­
lia comprise the total volume of water that is avail­
able due to external flows, internal flows, runoff and 
groundwater renewal generated by precipitation 
within the territory. Internally produced renewable 
water amounts to 7.8 cubic kilometers per year (km3/
yr) (FAO 2014), and Somalia also receives exter­
nally produced water from Ethiopia via transbound­
ary aquifers and rivers and wadis.2 These externally 
produced renewable water resources amount, in turn, 
to 8.2 km3/yr. In other words, more than half of Soma­
lia’s water resources are produced from beyond its 
national borders (FAO 2014).
There are two perennial rivers in the country, the 
Shabelle and the Jubba, both of which enter the 
country from Ethiopia, where the bulk of the river 
catchments volumes are located. The Jubba flow is 
more than twice that of Shabelle. The Jubba river flow 
in Luuq, close to where it enters Somalia, is about 5.9 
km3/yr, and that volume is hardly reduced along the 
river flow towards the ocean at about 5 km3/yr. The 
Jubba reduces by less than 20 percent from evapo­
transpiration, groundwater recharge, and utilization. 
In contrast, in Beledweyne district where the Shabelle 
river enters Somalia, the river flow is 2.4 km3/yr, and 
about 1.5 km3/yr at the end point, an area of alluvial 
deposits, close to the Jubba river. In other words, 
the Shabelle flow almost halves before recharging 
groundwater within the basin. For most years, the 
Shabelle river is a closed basin, with all water con­
sumed within the basin, except in occasional years 
SECTION 1
What are Somalia’s 
Water Resources? 
How are They Changing?
2. Wadis are valleys, ravines or canals that run mostly dry except 
during the rainy season.
=== PAGE 13 ===
11
when very wet conditions cause the river to overflow 
and discharge in the Jubba river and the ocean. 
Groundwater is Somalia’s largest natural water 
supply source and provides the main storage me­
dium. Springs are also found in many places, but 
discharges are small and disappear downstream be­
cause of water withdrawals, infiltration, and evapora­
tion. Large parts of Middle and Northern Somalia are 
underlain by low permeability sediments. However, 
deeper aquifers like the Auradu limestones in North 
Somalia or Quaternary sands are within drilling reach 
at a depth of between 100–400 m.
In addition, there are alluvial fills in basins such as 
the Nugaal valley, in the north of the Hargeisa depres­
sions. There are also fan deposits along mountain 
ranges, alluvium along wadis and the Shabelle and 
Jubba rivers and coastal dunes. The alluvial fills, fan 
deposits, alluvium along the wadis, and two perennial 
rivers as well as coastal dunes all contain groundwa­
ter at shallow depths (<15 m). These are essentially 
perched aquifer systems overlying the deep regional 
aquifers. The combination of soft formation and shal­
low groundwater make them ideal for groundwater 
abstraction by means of shallow, manually-drilled 
boreholes, and low-cost water lifting devices. 
The crystalline basement rocks in the Bay region in 
South Somalia and in the far north are not continuous 
aquifers; shallow, machine-drilled boreholes (30 to 
60 m) drilled into the bedrock in these fracture zones 
may yield 0.25 to 1 l/s. The clay, siltstone, and gyp­
sum deposits that cover large parts of Somalia such 
as the Sool, Sanaag, and Toghdeer regions in the 
North where the Taleh Formation overlies the Aura­
du limestone are categorized here as nonproductive 
formations; however, they could yield water (often 
brackish exceeding the 3,500 microS/cm threshold).
Over the last century, deep motorized boreholes 
(50 to 400 m) have been drilled into limestone and 
sandstone aquifers and thick alluvial sand deposits. 
Generally, borehole depths increase from west to 
east. Together with dug wells, they are the most fre­
quent water points registered in Somalia. The aver­
age number of users is 385 people and 3,200 animals 
per borehole. Water from deep boreholes is more 
suitable for urban and industrial water supply, while 
cheaper systems that tap shallow aquifers, or water 
in sand dams, are preferred for rural and small-town 
water supply and livestock water. Also, water quality is 
why groundwater is preferred for human consumption 
over surface or polluted water in shallow dug wells.
Ground and surface water resources are, howev­
er, not distributed evenly across the country, due to 
regional differences in climate. In the southern part 
and the far northwest of the country, a hot semi-arid 
climate and a tropical savannah climate exist (Ru­
bel and Kottek 2010). Rainfall varies with the region, 
ranging from 700 mm/yr in the south to less than 100 
mm/yr in the northeast.
Natural spring in Somaliland. (Photo courtesy: Stephen 
D’Alessandro)
Borehole drilling in Somaliland. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
Water Resources
=== PAGE 14 ===
12
1.2 Water Availability in the Face of 
Short-Term Weather Shocks and 
Long-Term Climate Change
The availability of water is not constant over time 
in Somalia. Seasonal rains and periodic droughts and 
flooding determine short-term water availability, espe­
cially in areas distant from the perennial rivers. Mean­
while, climate change is changing long-term trends in 
rainfall, temperature, and evaporation. These factors 
create the need to store water over time and provide 
a bridge during dry periods.
First the annual cycle of rainy and dry periods cre­
ates ephemeral rivers and seasonal water availability. 
Rains are mainly confined to the gu season (mon­
soon-like rains from March to June, often leading to 
flash floods) and the deyr season (starting in late Sep­
tember, ending in early December, and varying from 
place to place across the country). Runoff in wadis or 
toggas (seasonal rivers) persists for some hours to 
several days after rainfall. Overland flow arises when 
soils are waterlogged or water repellent or when rains 
are intense, notably if daily rainfall exceeds 20 mm/d 
(Basnyat 2007). This overland flow becomes concen­
trated and accumulated in low-lying areas and wadis.
In addition to annual rainfall seasonality, Somalia 
is subject to periodic droughts and years with exces­
sive rainfall. In Somalia, mild droughts are expected 
to occur every three and two years for the gu and 
deyr seasons, respectively; moderate droughts are 
expected every 11 and 12 years; and severe droughts 
Water Resources
every 28 years, for both seasons; extreme drought 
can be expected once every 37 and 110 years for the 
gu and deyr seasons, respectively (Shilenje and On­
goma 2014).
There is hardly any natural surface water storage 
in Somalia. Water can be diverted from temporary 
streams into masonry reservoirs, such as berkads 
(basin ponds) and hafirs or passively stored in wadi 
sediments behind sand dams and underground dams. 
Hafirs and berkads are typically fed by manageable 
runoff from upstream catchments of 2–3 km2 (Bas­
nyat 2007). During the dry season, reservoirs such 
as open water surfaces, but also hafirs and berkads 
may lose about 1 m of water from evaporation, which 
is a substantial part of their storage volume given that 
their depth is only a few meters.
The reliability of berkads and hafirs is not very 
high, as perceived by the respondents in the Somalia 
Water and Land Information Management (SWALIM) 
water points database. These systems fail to bridge 
the dry season during moderate droughts. Also, many 
shallow traditional dug wells, reaching only the up­
per shallow groundwater, will run dry during droughts. 
Boreholes that tap water which is well below the stat­
ic groundwater, large sand dams, and underground 
dams are meant to be the best options to cope with the 
effects of moderate and severe drought. Sand dams 
and other managed aquifer recharge techniques can 
increase groundwater storage, which does not suffer 
from such high evaporative losses.
Climate change increases the need for improved 
storage solutions. While total rainfall volumes may 
remain the same, or even slightly increase (FAO and 
WB 2018), the variability is expected to increase. 
Rainfall is predicted to come down in heavier events, 
hence floods are likely to become more frequent in 
the Jubba and Shabelle basins (Petersen and Gadain 
2012; Tierney et al. 2015). Droughts are also likely 
to become more frequent as an outcome of greater 
rainfall variability (FAO and WB 2018).
 A sand dam in Somaliland. (Photo courtesy: Chantal 
Richey)
=== PAGE 15 ===
13
Variability and environmental shocks in Somalia 
manifest themselves through the movement, migra­
tion, and displacement of people, both as nomadic 
pastoralists and as internally displaced peoples 
(IDPs). Shocks to the rural economy push people into 
peri-urban pockets of poverty as well as IDP settle­
ments. Health impacts for rural households are also 
significant due to the number of people with unim­
proved services, with an estimated 2 million people, 
or 22 percent, of the rural population currently relying 
on water from unimproved sources.
Water Resources
Water scooping in Lower Shabelle. (Photo courtesy: Local 
media, Jowhar)
1.3 Social Consequences of Water Shocks
Lives and livelihoods are shaped by Somalia’s 
uncertain water supplies. Water-related shocks in 
Somalia have contributed to poverty, displacement, 
biodiversity loss, and conflict. Extensive floods also 
result in significant crop losses and forced displace­
ment and make roads inaccessible, which also affects 
the transport and marketing of agricultural outputs 
from unaffected areas; whereas droughts pose a risk 
to agriculture, floods can cripple crop and livestock 
production. Areas without alternative, decentralized 
sources of water are likelier to be classified as being 
food insecure when compared to those with ground­
water resources.
Recurrent drought and flood events have had se­
vere humanitarian consequences. In the early 1990s, 
300,000 people died from hunger because of multi-
annual droughts. Due to floods in 1997 and 1998, 
around 1,400 casualties were estimated and another 
1 million were indirectly affected; more than 60,000 
ha of crops and farmland were lost. It has been diffi­
cult to develop resilience to these frequent extremes.
=== PAGE 16 ===
14
SECTION 2
How Water is Used in Somalia and 
How This is Changing
S
ection 2 describes who uses water in Soma­
lia and what water is used for. Understand­
ing of water contributions to the economy, 
from positions of sectoral outputs, international trade, 
and human capital is deepened, and the economic 
disruptions of the 2016–17 drought are presented. 
Scenarios for medium and long term water demand 
are touched upon, and the section concludes with 
benchmarking WASH in Somalia against other coun­
tries which contain arid and semi-arid zones, or which 
are located in the Horn of Africa.
2.1 Who Uses Water and 
for What is Water Used?
Inequality along income, gender, spatial, and other 
dimensions is critical to understanding water usage 
in Somalia. Inequalities in access to water supplies 
and sanitation between rural and urban populations, 
between IDP and non-IDP populations, and between 
men and women in Somalia are striking. It’s notewor­
thy, for example, that Somalia is the only country in 
the world where there is a rural-urban gap of more 
than 50 percentage points in access to a basic water 
supplies (WHO and UNICEF 2019).
A survey in Somaliland found that approximately 
60 percent of households relied on adult women to 
collect water (UNICEF 2011). Women who travel 
away from their residences to obtain water can risk 
their personal safety, with gender-based violence 
high in rural and nomadic areas in the country (MoE­
WR 2021).
Urban areas have grown over the last decades, 
increasing the demand for water by households and 
businesses. It is estimated that approximately 54 
percent of Somalia’s population now live in urban ar­
eas (World Bank 2021a). In cities, piped networks, 
point-source vendors at boreholes and dug wells, as 
well as truckers and animal and human-drawn cart­
ers deliver water to consumers. Large cities close to 
drought-prone areas have also received waves of 
IDPs that put pressure on scarce land and water re­
sources. This is especially the case in regions with 
large IDP settlements, where inequalities in water ac­
cess by IDP and non-IDP populations are prevalent.
Much-needed economic diversification in urban 
Filling water in Saaxo Mudud, Central Somalia. (Photo 
courtesy: Ahmed Mohamed Hassan)
=== PAGE 17 ===
15
areas is limited by water availability. Urban invest­
ments could generate large economic returns due to 
economies of scale and scope. The Ninth National 
Development Plan (NDP9) stresses the importance 
of achieving economic growth through nontraditional 
sectors, including by adding value to the livestock 
and crop production sectors. Water availability in ur­
ban areas is essential for agro-processing and live­
stock value chain exploitation. In the case of cities 
that rely on surface water from rivers, this will require 
forward-looking investments in managing upstream 
and downstream demand, variabilities in flow and wa­
ter storage, including large scale infrastructure. In the 
case of groundwater, some cities are already reach­
ing the limits of groundwater availability, while others 
still have considerable potential. 
In rural areas, water sources tend to be used for 
multiple purposes, including drinking, for domestic 
use, and to water livestock. Traditionally, pastoral­
ists moved themselves and their livestock to access 
year-round pastures and water sources. While this 
remains the case for some, migration to IDP settle­
ments has become a complementary coping strategy, 
as has family splitting. Movement of rural people to 
IDP settlements tends to be a response to flood and 
drought events but some IDPs remain in settlements.
2.2 Water’s Contribution to the Economy
Water (including its absence) contributes to eco­
nomic output, international trade, human capital for­
mation, and poverty in Somalia. It is not possible to 
quantify these contributions—data on amounts of wa­
ter consumed by different economic sectors do not 
exist, and even supply-side gross domestic product 
(GDP) statistics are not compiled at present, thus pre­
venting one from estimating the contribution of water-
intensive activities (for example, livestock production) 
to Somalia’s GDP.3 Nevertheless, one can trace out 
the channels through which water flows in the Somali 
economy.
2.2.1 Sectoral Output
The economic contribution of water is seen most 
clearly in livestock, agriculture, and forestry. Somalia 
encompasses large areas suitable for livestock graz­
ing, browsing, and fodder production; fertile alluvial 
soils for staple cereals, oil seeds, legumes, and hor­
ticulture crops; forests that provide prized gums and 
resins, as well as charcoal for cooking. Over 1 million 
agro-pastoral and nomadic households in Somalia 
rely on farming and livestock for their livelihoods and 
are, thus, particularly vulnerable to the impacts of me­
teorological and hydrological droughts (FGS 2018).
The waters of Somalia’s two perennial rivers have 
supported livestock rearing, which historically was the 
mainstay of the economy and the source of wealth for 
A water truck in Garowe. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
3. For examples of water resource accounting where data 
do exist, see Glenn-Marie Lange and Rashid Hassan, The 
Economics of Water Management in Southern Africa (Edward 
Elgar Publishing, 2007); and Nicholas Kilimani, Jan van Heerden, 
and Heinrich Bohlmann, “Water resource accounting for Uganda: 
Use and policy relevancy,” Water Policy 18 (February 2016).
Water Usage
=== PAGE 18 ===
16
most households. The national goat and sheep herd 
remains below its pre-civil war peak (FAOSTAT data 
reported in FAO and WB 2018). Boosting livestock 
production depends fundamentally on ensuring year-
round availability of livestock feed. Policies or invest­
ments into fodder production have potential to reap 
considerable rewards, although there is need to bal­
ance short terms gains with long term sustainability, 
and to consider the contentious issue of land enclo­
sures vis-à-vis open grazing.
For many decades—or centuries—agriculture 
has been practiced along floodplains of the Jubba 
and Shabelle rivers, producing food for both local 
consumption and export. Cereal production peaked 
in 1989, however, and declined steadily during the 
2010s, reflecting challenges of inadequate water and 
transport infrastructure, persistent insecurity, weak 
regulatory and enabling institutions, and severe en­
vironmental degradation of rangelands and forested 
areas (FAO and WB 2018). Nevertheless, there is 
considerable potential to rebuild both subsistence 
and commercial agricultural production, which would 
support integration of rural and urban economies and 
reduce food import dependency. This would require 
improving soil and water conservation techniques in 
areas of rainfed agriculture.4 Stone bunds, terraces, 
and half-moons reduce overland runoff and ero­
sion, promote infiltration, and increase soil moisture 
content (Liniger and Critchley 2007). Irrigation can 
expand crop production in areas with adequate sur­
face water, as irrigation water demands of about 0.5 
to 1 l/s/ha (50 to 100 l/s/km2) far exceed renewable 
groundwater resources (0.03 to 0.63 l/s/km2).
Water contributes to the economy through forestry, 
although one must acknowledge that deforestation in 
Somalia has been significant over the past 50 years, 
with flood plain forests essentially gone (one of sev­
eral factors contributing to the disruptions caused by 
flooding). Given the ongoing unfortunate dependence 
on charcoal as a source of energy, and importance of 
forests in soil conservation, agroforestry is an impor­
tant, and underexplored, subsector.
2.2.2 International Trade
Water is inextricably linked to the goods and ser­
vices that Somalia trades with the rest of the world. 
Animal, agricultural, and forestry products—all of 
which rely heavily on Somalia’s water resources—
have dominated recorded goods exports since the 
country’s independence.5 Bananas and other fruit 
and vegetables were the largest exports during the 
1960s; sheep, goats, cattle, and camels became the 
dominant exports starting in the 1970s and, at differ­
ent times, sesame and other oil seeds, meat, and for­
estry products (gums, resins, and charcoal) have av­
eraged as much as 5–10 percent of recorded goods 
exports (World Bank Group 2021b). There is scope to 
Water Usage
Irrigation channel in Jowhar being dredged. (Photo 
courtesy: Ahmed Mohamed Hassan)
4. Less than 5 percent of land in Somalia is considered suitable 
for cultivation, of which over 75 percent is suitable for rainfed 
agriculture, and the remaining 25 percent has potential for 
irrigation (FAO and WB 2018).
5. Data reported by Somalia’s trade partners to the United Nations 
COMTRADE database show that these products accounted for 
more than half—and usually more than 80 percent—of recorded 
goods exported from Somalia each year between 1962 and 
2018. As services exports are currently of similar magnitude as 
goods exports, these products’ share of Somalia’s total exports 
is smaller—the latest official national accounts statistics show 
that livestock has accounted for 26 percent of total exports of 
goods and services between 2018 and 2020 (National Bureau of 
Statistics 2021). These statistics do not include Somalia’s informal 
and other small-scale, cross-border exports to neighboring 
countries in the Horn of Africa, which may exceed total recorded 
flows and much of which is believed to be livestock (World Bank 
2021b).
=== PAGE 19 ===
17
increase exports of these products and by developing 
agro-processing industries to increase the economic 
value from their production—and thereby to increase 
water’s contribution to the Somali economy (FAO and 
WB 2018).
Water usage is also reflected in trends in the com­
position and level of Somalia’s imports. Displacement 
of the rural population to the cities and the destruction 
of irrigation systems caused by civil war, state frag­
mentation, and climatic shocks fundamentally trans­
formed the commodity composition of imports. Since 
1990, food, beverages, and tobacco have accounted 
for half of recorded goods imports, compared to 19 
percent in the 1960s and 1970s, while the share rep­
resented by capital goods and transport equipment 
dropped to an average of 12 percent since 1990 from 
40 percent before 1990 (World Bank 2021b). Total im­
ports of goods and services now average around 80 
percent of the GDP, as shown in Figure 1, compared 
to between 20 and 40 percent during most of the pre-
1990 period. Somalia’s large trade deficit is financed 
largely by private remittances and official grants. As 
Somalia continues its trajectory out of fragility and re­
builds its economy, domestic food production should 
again become competitive with imports.
2.2.3 Human Capital
Water that is safe, reliable water and readily acces­
sible—located in or close to the home—is essential 
for human health and, therefore, for labor productiv­
ity and human capital development. In both rural and 
urban areas of Somalia, diseases associated with 
poor water leads to reduced labor productivity, but 
the economic impacts are particularly acute in rural 
areas, where communities are constantly battling 
environmental and macroeconomic shocks instead 
of building more productive and resilient economies. 
Micronutrient deficiencies related to poor diets are 
widespread in Somalia and have far-reaching, long-
term health consequences, including high rates of 
premature infant and maternal mortality and morbid­
ity. Poor nutrition reduces labor productivity, with cas­
cading impacts on income and poverty. It often leads 
to illness, a serious problem for poor households, be­
cause health costs can force them to tap savings, sell 
assets or go into debt, inevitably pushing them further 
into poverty.
Water also contributes to education. Improving ac­
cess to education for girls, keeping them in school, 
and bringing them into secondary school education 
can enhance their opportunities to join the labor 
Water Usage
Figure 1. Imports as a Share of GDP, 1962–2020
Sources: World Development Indicators (1960–1990) and National Bureau of Standards (2012–20). No data are available for 1991–2011.
Percentage of GDP
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1962-76 avg: 24.1
1977-84 avg: 68.7
1985
1990
2010
2015
2020
1985-90 avg: 30.8
2012-20 avg: 80.5
=== PAGE 20 ===
18
market and contribute to economic development, 
and may also reduce Somali fertility rates. The wa­
ter sector has an extremely important role to play to 
keep girls in school by ensuring that suitable WASH 
facilities are available, and that menstrual hygiene 
management is catered for. Given the paucity of in­
formation on education, including WASH in schools in 
Somalia, as reflected in international comparisons, a 
starting point is the collection of this data.
2.2.4 The 2016–17 Drought 
and Economic Disruptions
Water’s contribution to Somalia’s economy is per­
haps most evident when water is absent, as during 
the drought of 2016–17. The Federal Government 
of Somalia’s (FGS) post-disaster assessment (FGS 
2018) estimated economic losses from the drought at 
US$2.2 billion and damages at US$1.0 billion. Losses 
and damages to irrigated and rainfed crops, livestock, 
and fisheries accounted for 59 percent of all the ef­
fects, while water and sanitation, environment, and 
transport make up 38 percent. An estimated 6.4 mil­
lion of the total livestock population was lost, equiva­
lent to about US$350 million. The drought displaced 
an additional 926,000 people to settlements in Moga­
dishu and other cities. 
The frequency of drought (and more recently flood) 
episodes has repeatedly resulted in economic dam­
ages and losses, which tend to be met with a reactive 
disaster response. Managing drought and flood risks 
comprehensively will help develop resilience.
2.3 Scenarios for Medium- 
and Long-Term Water Demand
The ‘Economics of Water’ study developed a sim­
ple hydrological model to study the basins of Soma­
lia’s two perennial rivers. Comparing water demands 
or needs in 2030 for rural and urban population and 
livestock with the sustainably available water resourc­
es shows that water needs are below these critical 
values except for Benadir region around Mogadishu, 
where the high urban water demand in combination 
with a small and little water producing region makes 
the scarcity ratio jump above the absolute water scar­
city ratio of 100 percent. The model also indicates 
that some locations in the Shabelle river basin would 
be excluded from growing cereals and perennials 
in 2050. Projected water demand numbers devel­
oped under the ‘Somalia: Groundwater Assessment 
Technical Report’ show that by 2030 water needs 
will range geographically from 5 m3/yr in Bari district 
to over 20 m3/yr in Gedo for livestock; urban water 
needs will range from approximately 8 m3/yr in Middle 
Shabelle to over 45 m3/yr in Benadir, and rural water 
needs from approximately 10 m3/yr in Middle Jubba to 
just under 30 m3/yr in Lower Shabelle. 
Projections for 2035 show that long term average 
runoff would deliver enough water in Shabelle to sus­
tain people and livestock, but water would be only 
available in the lower sections for a few months per 
year (that is, probably only during the wet season). 
Otherwise, the basin would be dry. By 2050, irrigated 
farming would be reduced, as compared to both 2020 
Water Usage
Collecting water in Hudur Bakool. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
=== PAGE 21 ===
19
and 2035, not because of land scarcity, but due to 
water scarcity. A reduction in inflows due to climate 
change, or with more water use upstream, is likely to 
render the situation more difficult to manage. 
This analysis is at a regional level. If the model­
ing were carried out at district level, several districts 
would most likely exceed the scarcity limits, and if 
modeling were to consider the scale of settlements 
and their direct surroundings, water scarcity is ex­
pected in about 30 to 40 towns. 
2.4 Benchmarking Comparisons of 
Water and Sanitation Data
Figures 2 and 3 (overleaf) benchmark Somalia 
against the 28 African countries which contain arid 
and semi-arid zones, or which are located in the Horn 
of Africa. The WASH statistics are drawn from the 
most recent Joint Monitoring Report (WHO and UNI­
CEF 2021). 
In terms of the main source of drinking water, 56 
percent of Somalia’s population use at least a basic 
service. This figure is within 6 percentage points of 
all other countries in the Horn of Africa apart from 
Djibouti (Figure 2a). The North African countries plus 
Water Usage
Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal, and Mali have consid­
erably higher figures, as do South Africa, Namibia, 
and Botswana. Analysis of rural drinking water data 
presented in Figure 2b shows that the proportion of 
the population using limited source (requiring more 
than 30 minutes of collection time), is particularly high 
in Somalia at 37 percent, exceeded only by South Su­
dan (42 percent) and Burkina Faso (39 percent). This 
is illustrative of the rural-urban gap in water supplies. 
At the national level, the use of basic sanitation in 
Somalia, by 39 percent of the population, is higher 
than most East and Southern Africa countries apart 
from Djibouti, South Africa, and Botswana (Figure 
3a). However, there is considerable variation be­
tween countries overall. Comparing the use of basic 
sanitation between rural and urban areas, Figure 3b 
shows that there is a difference of 19 percentage 
points between rural and urban Somalis, with rural 
dwellers less likely to use at least basic sanitation. In 
three countries (Mali, Mauritania, and Sudan), use of 
at least basic sanitation is higher in rural than in urban 
areas. However, the rural gap with respect to sanita­
tion is larger than Somalia’s in most countries (apart 
from Zimbabwe, Kenya, and Uganda).
Staff of the Ministry of Environment, Agriculture, and Climate Change at a newly constructed water 
trough in Xamxama, Puntland. (Photo courtesy: Chantal Richey)
=== PAGE 22 ===
20
Water Usage
Figure 3. Comparison of Select Sanitation Data between 
African Countries Containing Arid Regions and the Horn of Africa
(3b) Difference between rural and urban use of basic 
sanitation in percentage points (+ shows higher 
access in urban areas)
(3a) Proportion of the total population using at least 
basic sanitation (%)
9
97
-17
57
Figure 2. Comparison of Select Drinking Water Data between 
African Countries Containing Arid Regions and the Horn of Africa 
(2b) Proportion of the rural population using a limited 
source (takes more than 30 minutes) for their main 
drinking water supply (%)
(2a) Proportion of the total population using a main 
drinking water supply that is at least basic (%)
41
99
1
42
=== PAGE 23 ===
21
SECTION 3
How is Water Managed 
and Governed?
A
lthough the Somali water sector has, in 
theory, many features of a comprehensive 
multigovernance framework, in practice, 
water service provision is minimally regulated and is 
currently dominated by international partners, devel­
opment financing institutions, the private sector, and 
households themselves. This fragmented approach 
to service delivery comes along with challenges, par­
ticularly the coordination among the various actors, 
which is inadequate. The failure to translate policies 
(of which there are very few good quality ones) into 
action has led to the partial neglect of many intrinsic 
functions of a functional water governance frame­
work—for instance, regulation of the quality of water 
supply services, setting optimal tariffs and collection 
of revenues, operation and maintenance of water ser­
vices, and ensuring equity in service delivery. 
3.1 Current Framework of 
Laws and Policies
The Xeer, Somalia’s traditional law system, is an 
unwritten code of conduct that has governed its clan-
based society over centuries. It includes provisions 
that deal with the management of water, pastoral 
land, forests, frankincense, and marine activity. The 
Xeer has specific rules for water sharing and queu­
ing, especially during times of water scarcity, and set­
tling water-sharing disputes between hostile clans.6 
In the latter half of the 2010s, after a prolonged 
period of state collapse, Somalia started developing 
the constitutional framework needed to anchor wa­
ter sector institutions, thus establishing a rudimentary 
multilevel water governance framework. Key legisla­
tions are:
•	 The Water Act of 2011 is the core legal instrument 
of the Somali water sector. It made the Ministry of 
Water Development (MoWD) the sole custodian 
of the development and management of water 
resources. However, due to legislative issues sur­
rounding the law’s structure, as of early 2021, the 
provisions of the Water Act are yet to be imple­
mented. 
•	 Somalia’s Provisional Constitution (2012) has spe­
cific articles related to the usage and management 
of water in Chapters 2 (Articles 25-1, 27-1), Chap­
ter 3 (44, 45-1), and Chapter 5 (54(1a)). 
In terms of policy landscape, the National Water 
Resource Development Strategy (NWRS) of 2021 
contains detailed directives to operationalize the wa­
ter sector’s governance framework as laid out in the 
Water Act of 2011. It is the latest effort by the govern­
ment to modernize institutions and restore services. 
The NWRS’s provisions contribute to the strategic 
plan for activities required to address challenges in 
the water sector in the short- and long-term.
The Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Sector 
6. Somali Customary Law and Traditional Economy, Puntland 
Development Research Center, 2003.
=== PAGE 24 ===
22
Policy, 2019, encapsulates several policy measures 
related to water service delivery—urban and rural 
water supply, community-level water resource man­
agement, and water quality. Somaliland, Puntland, 
and Jubbaland have developed state-level water 
policies and have made some progress towards their 
implementation. The Livestock Sector Development 
Strategy, the National Climate Change Policy, and the 
National Adaptation Programme of Action directly or 
indirectly have a bearing on the water sector. 
3.2 Public Sector Institutions 
and Capacity
The public sector consists of the following minis­
tries at the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
and Federal Member State (FMS) levels:
•	 The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources 
(MoEWR) is the federal ministry responsible for 
the management of energy and water resources at 
the federal level. Its mandate includes the formula­
tion of policies and standard operating procedures, 
monitoring and technical support of the FMS con­
cerning the water and energy sectors; and the de­
livery of sanitation services.7 Sanitation services 
are not currently coordinated by the MoEWR due 
to capacity constraints. 
•	 The Department of Water, one of the many func­
tional departments of the MoEWR, is responsible 
for the planning, management, and regulation 
of the water sector. It consists of four divisions: 
(a) Water for Production; (b) Technical; (c) Water 
Development; and (d) Water Supply.
•	 Federal Member States: Each FMS—Puntland, 
Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South West State, and 
Jubbaland—has a Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources line ministry that implements policy and 
performs a range of de facto functions related to 
the implementation of water infrastructure devel­
opment and rehabilitation projects.
•	 In Somaliland, the Ministry of Water Resources 
discharges functions similar to the MoEWR.
Public spending on new water infrastructure and 
responses to water-related climate shocks such as 
drought and floods is limited. Insufficient revenue mo­
bilization is one fundamental constraint. Total domes­
tic revenue collected by the FGS, Somaliland, and 
the five FMS was estimated at 10 percent of GDP in 
2018—considerably lower than revenue mobilization 
in neighboring countries or in other fragile and con­
flict-affected states (World Bank Group 2020). Bud­
get allocations to the water sector are minimal. The 
federal MoEWR has consistently received less than 1 
percent of the FGS budget since 2014 (Table 1). Vir­
tually all its spending goes to salaries and other em­
ployment costs. Given the severe budget constraints 
as well as competing priorities of security and state-
building, allocation of the FGS budget to all capital 
investments is small—averaging only 3.5 percent of 
Table 1. Key FGS Fiscal Indicators, 2014–20
	
2014	
2015	
2016	
2017	
2018	
2019	
2020
FGS capital spending (US$ million)	
$0.16	
$2.29	
$5.94	
$6.35	
$9.64	
$13.93	
$18.55
Share of total FGS spending	
0.11%	
1.7%	
3.5%	
2.6%	
3.4%	
4.4%	
3.7%
Total MoEWR spending (US$ million)	
$0.62 	
$0.45 	
$0.49 	
$0.88 	
$1.02 	
$1.11 	
$1.77 
	
o/w personnel costs (US$ million)	
$0.51 	
$0.38 	
$0.45 	
$0.82 	
$0.98 	
$1.07 	
$1.09 
MoEWR’s share of FGS spending	
0.41%	
0.33%	
0.29%	
0.36%	
0.35%	
0.35%	
0.36%
7. MoEWR website. Retrieved on February 22, 2021: https://
moewr.gov.so/about-us/mandate/.
Water Management
Source: World Bank staff calculations using Ministry of Finance outturn data (www.mof.gov/fiscal).
=== PAGE 25 ===
23
total FGS spending between 2014 and 2020—and 
mostly financed by donors.
Financial constraints also limit public sector staff­
ing. The shortfall of adequately trained personnel 
across all functional domains—technical, administra­
tion, information technology and finance—across the 
FMS water ministries was cited consistently by key 
informants for this study. Limited financial resources 
are a binding constraint to the recruitment and reten­
tion of qualified personnel, further exacerbating the 
public sector skill gap in the water governance frame­
work. Key informants expressed their belief that the 
skills gap in the public water sector is driven not by 
the scarcity of qualified personnel in the country but 
by the significant differences in salaries offered by 
the public sector and private companies, nongovern­
mental organizations (NGOs), and international or­
ganizations. Competing for capable and experienced 
personnel is a critical challenge for the Somali public 
sector. 
The infrastructure and equipment installed during 
the eras before the Somali Civil War are dilapidated 
and/or outdated because of neglect during the civil 
war years. As such, present FMS water ministries 
have limited infrastructure and equipment to carry 
out their functions effectively. This extends to ministry 
buildings, information technology infrastructure, lo­
gistics infrastructure, and technical equipment.
 The fragmented nature of the water sector, the 
amorphous distinction of roles and responsibilities 
concerning policies, and human resource capacity 
constraints diminish the regulatory and coordinative 
capacity of federal and state ministries. Thus, the 
actions of various players in the Somalia water sec­
tor are poorly regulated. The lack of coordination is 
a barrier to the efficient use of available resources 
and financing. The dilution of the role of state-level 
water ministries is manifested in the absence of stan­
dardization in the process of securing approvals for 
the construction and operation of water resources 
across the FMS. High monetary overheads associ­
ated with monitoring and evaluation functions of FMS 
water ministries are another obstacle to the efficient 
discharge of its mandated roles and responsibilities.
Though constitutional provisions mandate regu­
lar meetings between federal and state-level minis­
tries to coordinate water management issues, most 
interactions are conducted on an ad hoc basis. The 
irregularity of such multilevel meetings results in the 
misalignment of priorities and needs assessments 
between the two levels of government.
The ‘Somalia Urbanization Review’ (World Bank 
Group 2020) cites urban centers as Somalia’s most 
powerful and promising anchors of future develop­
ment. However, contested, fragmented, and ineffec­
tive municipal governance is a key issue and the re­
view recommends that immediate steps are taken to 
clearly demarcate responsibilities between national, 
state, and district or municipal authorities. This sce­
nario plays out in the water sector, where service 
delivery remains largely unmanaged by municipali­
ties. Clan alliances also exist within cities, which can 
weaken social cohesion and service delivery. Alas, 
demographic data on Somali cities remain inade­
quate and not all city boundaries are clear, presenting 
challenges for infrastructure development planning. 
The dilapidated state of irrigation infrastructure in the 
riverine areas of Southern Somalia. (Photo courtesy: 
Ahmed Mohamed Hassan)
Water Management
=== PAGE 26 ===
24
3.3 Water Services 
These multiple levels of public sector institutions 
are complemented by a vibrant private sector.8 Water 
services across the country are delivered by public, 
private, and international institutions, as well as by 
households themselves, and are largely unregulated.
Private operators play a critical role in service 
delivery, filling gaps in the public provision of water 
services. Private water providers fall into three broad 
categories:
(a)	 Aspiring water utilities, which are relatively so­
phisticated private businesses that operate bore­
holes and supply piped water connections to 
large parts of many primary/secondary cities.9 
(b)	 Small-scale providers, a fragmented network, 
ranging from small businesses to individual en­
trepreneurs, which serve smaller sections of ur­
ban and peri-urban areas.
(c)	 Private entities that provide water services in ter­
ritories under the control of Al-Shabaab. There is 
very limited information about the operations of 
these businesses. 
 Though many public-private partnerships (PPPs), 
loosely defined, are in place between FMS ministries 
and private providers, the limited oversight and moni­
toring capacity of FMS’ MoEWR often precludes the 
public dimension in such partnerships. Even though 
the policy framework vests regulatory authority (con­
cerning tariffs and operational standards) with the 
FMS MoEWRs, their inchoate nature and limited ca­
pacities prevent them from comprehensively exercis­
ing their regulatory functions. The limited regulation 
of the private water sector is frequently cited as the 
main reason for high water prices across Somalia 
(discussed in more detail below). While FMS MoE­
WRs can keep track of relatively large quasi water 
utilities and monitor the entry of new entrants in this 
segment, the multitude of individual water entrepre­
neurs in every FMS precludes their efficient tracking 
and regulation.
Village- and community-level water committees 
play a central role in water resource management. 
Often, they require extensive capacity-building be­
fore they can independently manage the operations 
of their respective water points. Key informant in­
terviews touched upon plug-and-play type water re­
source development projects, which often fail due to 
the inability of the hastily trained water committees 
to sustainably manage the operations of the respec­
tive water point. Rent-seeking behavior on the part of 
powerful community members in the water commit­
tees, limited enforcement of the roles and responsi­
bilities post-hand-over, and a lack of ongoing external 
support for water committees leads to irregularities in 
the revenue collection process.
In addition, United Nations (UN) agencies, do­
nors, international agencies and NGOs also play a 
significant role. The international development com­
munity has for many years provided Somalia with vi­
tal humanitarian emergency support by establishing 
Water Management
A shallow well in Hudur Bakool. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
8. This assessment is based on the principles of good water 
governance defined in the AfDB’s Water Sector Governance 
framework. These principles include equity, efficiency, 
participation, decentralization, integration, transparency, and 
accountability.
9. Number of large operators: nine in Hirshabelle, three in 
Jubbaland (excluding an undefined number in Lower Jubba 
and Gedo regions), and three in Puntland. Although Galmudug 
records having 31 operators, it is unlikely that all of these can be 
classified as large operators.
=== PAGE 27 ===
25
systems to fund, plan, and deliver assistance across 
the country, often in parallel with the government’s 
structures and efforts. The Somali WASH cluster is 
a collaboration of local and international NGOs, gov­
ernment departments, and UN agencies involved in 
the WASH sector, and is led by the United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The main objective of the 
cluster is to strengthen the capacity for emergency 
preparedness and disaster risk reduction through ef­
ficient and transparent dissemination of data and in­
formation. The cluster mechanism is appropriate for 
humanitarian response coordination during and post 
crises. With stability, however, sector oversight is the 
remit of the MoEWR and the cluster system functions 
should be taken over by government.
With growing political confidence, security, and 
stability in Somalia, there is a need for the support 
that is provided by the UN and other international or­
ganizations and NGOs, to transition from emergency 
humanitarian support towards long-term program­
matic support. The institutional arrangements that the 
federal and state governments provide should be uti­
lized during programmatic implementation to provide 
oversight and coordination, and to promote national 
ownership and long-lasting results within the water 
and development sector.
3.4 Gender Parity and Social Inclusion
Gender issues in Somalia are multilayered and 
complex. They are particularly relevant for the rural 
water sector where at the community level, while one 
or two positions are reserved for women in village 
water committees, customary law and cultural norms 
undermine women’s input into management and de­
cision making. 
As seen in other countries, when women are not in­
cluded in the planning process, their concerns—such 
as where a water source should be constructed—are 
not usually considered (Khandker et al. 2020). Re­
search in other countries also shows that the active 
participation of women in local water supply manage­
ment can support mobilizing finance and fee collec­
tion and enhance sustainability (Lundqvist 1999; van 
Wijk-Sijbesma 1998), while if they participate in water 
user associations it can increase their social standing 
(Khandker et al. 2020).
Women have important roles to play in water man­
agement and need to be very well supported. Though 
women in Somalia are often consulted about the 
community management of water resources, they 
have been traditionally excluded from the final deci­
sion-making process. While water committees may 
reserve one to two perfunctory spots for women, in 
the Xeer system, women are excluded from being 
part of the committee of elders and are not allowed to 
act as advocates for others.
These gender disparities weaken effective water 
governance in Somalia, and it is essential that re­
forms to water governance and investments include 
women. At the national level, gender inequality is 
also evident in women’s low participation in leader­
ship and decision-making roles. Although data on 
women’s participation in Somalia water sector institu­
tions are not available, anecdotal evidence indicates 
that most decision makers are men, and that women 
rarely play a central role in defining water policies, 
programs, and laws. Women’s low participation in de­
Water Management
Rainwater harvesting in Puntland. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
=== PAGE 28 ===
26
Water Management
cision making is influenced by religious and cultural 
factors, and also by a lack of training and education 
opportunities in the water sector. An overwhelming 
majority of female respondents who participated in a 
2020 survey indicated that they want more opportuni­
ties to participate in decision making (92 percent) and 
indicated that they would have more access to a deci­
sion maker if that person was a woman (86.6 percent) 
(World Bank 2021c). 
3.5 Water Prices and Market Regulation
An analysis of water prices collected by the Food 
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) at weekly inter­
vals over five years between 2015 and 2019 reveals 
two key issues. First, even though water prices across 
Somalia are significantly higher than in surrounding 
countries, there is substantial variation across re­
gions within the country (Figure 4). While a spike in 
prices in 2017 corresponds with the onset of drought 
A wide variety of users gather at water points in Hudur Bakool. (Photos courtesy: Ahmed Mohamed Hassan)
conditions, some regions, including Sool, witnessed 
more drastic increases in prices. Second, while the 
divergence in water prices across regions is also evi­
dent in the plot of the weekly price of water (Figure 
5), some regions, including Awdal, Waqooyi Galbeed, 
and Togdheer seem to experience far lesser variation 
in prices over time. 
The ‘Somalia Economics of Water’ study’s analysis 
of price trends may be suggestive but is hardly con­
clusive. Deeper analysis is needed to inform policy 
development and investment choices. This analysis 
might look at the interplay between market struc­
ture (number of suppliers, barriers to entry, and so 
on), enterprise characteristics (ownership, size, cost 
structure, capital stock), locational factors (proximity 
to water resources, customers, conflict, and so on), 
the regulatory environment, and seasonality.
 The National Water Resources Strategy 2021–
2025 (NWRS) proposes regulations of water pricing 
and rules on competition to overcome economic inef­
ficiencies that prevail in Somalia’s context of limited 
water resources. Insecurity and poorly specified prop­
erty rights discourage investment, keeping scale low 
and unit prices high. The ‘aspiring utilities’ have mar­
ket power and are able to charge prices well above 
costs in the absence of any effective government reg­
ulation. Since large-scale storage is largely nonexis­
tent, weather shocks quickly become price shocks.
=== PAGE 29 ===
27
Water Management
Figure 4. Water Price by Region—
Water Drum (200L): Average Annual Price (2015–2019)
Source: FAO.
Figure 5. Water Prices by Region— 
Water Drum (200L): Weekly Prices (2015–2019)
Source: Staff calculations using FAO data.
=== PAGE 30 ===
28
4.1 Gaps between Demand and Supply
The study estimates regional water demands in 
2030 (Figure 6) and finds that, except for the Benadir 
region, water needs are below sustainably available 
water resources. However, water shortages still occur 
in certain districts, or at places with highly concen­
trated demand like towns or during drought. 
In the Benadir region around Mogadishu, the high 
urban water demand in combination with a low pro­
duction means that water scarcity is very high. As 
noted in Section 1, at the scale of settlements and 
their direct surroundings, this study foresees water 
scarcity for about 30 to 40 towns. While boreholes 
are important for Somalia’s drinking water supplies, 
high yielding boreholes are not abundant. This needs 
to be considered in relation to urban development 
and calls for diversification of water supply sources in 
some localities.
SECTION 4
What are the Investment Needs 
and Options?
Figure 6. Sources of Projected Water Demand in 2030, by Region
Source: World Bank, Somalia: Groundwater Assessment Technical Report (2020).
million m3/yr
Livestock
Urban (2030, growth % 4.14, WB 2014)
Rural (2030, growth % 1.79, WB 2014)
=== PAGE 31 ===
29
The amount of water assumed as being used to­
day for household purposes in Somalia is estimated 
around 20 l/cap/day in rural areas and 40 in urban 
areas. One should consider that these usage levels 
reflect high poverty levels. Note further that water 
needs are based on annual figures. For specific dry 
season months or dry years, there will not necessar­
ily be enough water available to meet needs. In such 
cases, improving water storage or access to stored 
water is essential. Dedicated water storage in shal­
low sand aquifers can increase well capacities and 
enhance climate resilience.
The simple model developed by the study indi­
cates that, in 2050, there will not be sufficient water 
available to irrigate land that is potentially available in 
Shabelle basin for agriculture. There is a need to con­
sider water allocation, appropriate river infrastructure, 
and improving water use efficiencies. There is also a 
need to promote regional development and win-win 
opportunities within the Horn of Africa.
4.2 Available Options
As described in earlier sections, groundwater is 
the principal water resource available in Somalia, 
and this section summarizes the pros and cons of 
the main technologies used for water supply. A cost-
effectiveness analysis, described in detail in the full 
Synthesis Report, has been undertaken to show the 
relative contribution of each one of these water sup­
ply options to bridge the water gap, thus suggesting 
some criteria for the prioritization of investments.
Berkads are open-plastered cisterns dug in uncon­
solidated soil or hewn in bedrock. Storage capacities 
generally range from 150 to 500 m3. Hafirs, in turn, 
are created behind dams on gently sloping terrain, 
preferably on clayey soils to reduce infiltration losses. 
Storage capacities of these water harvesting systems 
range from 500 to 10,000 m3. Depending on rainfall, 
berkads and hafirs store water for approximately 
A berkad in Somaliland. (Photo courtesy: Chantal Richey)
Investment Options
=== PAGE 32 ===
30
two to five months after the end of the rainy season. 
Evaporation is high in these reservoirs (potentially 
1,500 to 2,500 mm/yr) and leads to large losses. Just 
like the hand-dug wells, the berkads and hafirs are 
bacteriologically polluted and not safe as sources for 
drinking water supply. The estimated annual total cost 
per water produced is US$1.51/m3.10
Another more recent intervention are sand dams 
and underground dams (subsurface dams) in combi­
nation with collector drains and wells. Sand dams are 
constructed in the alluvial beds of wadis (toggas/sea­
sonal rivers). The storage capacities of the sand bod­
ies behind these dams vary from 5,000 to 40,000 m3. 
This volume is available for use during the dry sea­
son (180 days) but is often augmented by recharge 
through groundwater inflow from the surrounding 
soils. The estimated annual total cost per water pro­
duced is US$0.25/m3 with a handpump and US$0.52 
with a motor pump.
By its side, production capacities of hand-dug 
wells, in alluvial unconsolidated sands in tectonic 
depressions or along the wadis, is about 1 m3/hr or 
5 m3/d depending on the type of pump. As the wells 
depend on shallow groundwater the water levels fluc­
tuate strongly both seasonally and interannually. At 
the end of the dry season dug wells often run dry. 
However, water in most open traditional dug wells is 
compromised by the presence of pathogen microor­
ganisms. Improved (lined and closed) dug wells with 
handpumps provide better quality water. The estimat­
ed annual total cost per water produced is US$0.72/
m3 including a handpump and US$0.53 if a motor 
pump is used.
Subsurface dams and wadis provide important 
shallow groundwater supplies and may have further 
untapped potential. Better use of Somalia’s ground­
water resources presents an opportunity to improve 
resilience by relying on the buffering capacity offered 
by considerable storage reserve volumes. However, 
water quality does need to be considered, particularly 
salinity, fluoride, and microbiological contamination.
Groundwater use in Somalia could be further en­
hanced in certain areas with the introduction of rela­
tively cheap manual drilling. Manually-drilled wells 
are a practical alternative for boreholes in alluvial 
soils and soft rock formation with a depth up to 40 
meters, are lower cost than machine-drilled wells, 
and are also a good alternative for hand dug wells. 
Furthermore, manual drilled boreholes can penetrate 
deeper than excavated wells, and if properly sealed, 
they provide better protection from surface contami­
nation. The estimated annual total cost per water pro­
duced is US$0.58 m3 with a handpump and US$0.46 
with a motor pump.
 Constructions such as sand dams and under­
ground dams, already successfully applied under 
the Biyoole project, should be continued. Recharge 
ponds surrounded by shallow wells are also options 
for further investigations. Apparently, they already ex­
ist as van Haren et al. (2017) mention the presence 
of hafirs on permeable subsurfaces in Somaliland, 
where infiltrated water is captured by shallow wells. 
The technology options presented above relate 
predominantly to rural and peri-urban water supply. 
Future analysis is required to build on options for ur­
ban water supply and sanitation.
10. Statistics on water production costs presented in this 
subsection can be found in Table 8 of the full Synthesis Report.
Investment Options
An earth dam in Puntland. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hasan)
=== PAGE 33 ===
31
SECTION 5
Recommendations Summary
W
ater insecurity negatively impacts hu­
man capital through multiple pathways 
(Figure 7) and is a deterrent to econom­
ic growth and social development. Conservation of 
water resources and aquatic ecosystems alongside 
environmental regeneration is a prerequisite to make 
the gains of social and economic progress sustain­
able. Investing in increasing improved access to wa­
ter and sanitation is an essential driver of economic 
growth and human development.
The ‘Somalia Economics of Water’ study conclud­
ed that all water sector investments should be priori­
tized based on the twin objectives of (a) their poten­
tial to improve long-term water availability as a critical 
contribution to water security and climate change ad­
aptation; and (b) the extent to which they contribute 
towards wider socioeconomic development, reduce 
inequalities, and create economic and human devel­
opment opportunities. Somalia can use water access 
to improve coping measures and build resilience for 
rural communities through pathways which improve 
subsistence agriculture, create more jobs, and sup­
port urbanization.
5.1 Priorities for Policy Reforms and 
Institutional Strengthening
In July 2021, the Federal Government of Somalia 
(FGS) published the National Water Resources Strat­
egy (NWRS). A first for Somalia, the NWRS describes 
the critical economic and social importance of water 
in Somali society. It identifies opportunities to use 
access to water as a key stepping stone for socio­
economic development as well as an entry point to 
peace building. Managing Somalia’s water resources 
requires a strategic national approach that involves 
the engagement of key government actors, the pri­
vate sector, civil society, as well as the support of a 
range of international cooperating partners and de­
velopment financing institutions. The NWRS provides 
a suite of strategies, objectives, and actions for the 
water sector for 2021–2025, although some of the 
expected outcomes will only be realized in the lon­
ger term. The NWRS targets to unlock key actions 
and align with the Provisional Constitution (2012), 
Sustainable Development Goals, and sectoral poli­
cies and laws. The NDP9 will be the key driver for 
the NWRS over the next five to 10 years. The vision 
of the NWRS is: “Sustainable, equitable and secure 
water for national unity, growth and well-being, for all 
and in harmony with nature”. The NWRS includes a 
roadmap that sets out flagship projects numerically 
and the concluding tables in this report align to this 
NWRS roadmap.
With the finalization of the NWRS 2021, propos­
ing and assignment of public sector responsibilities 
for federal, state, and local governments as set out 
in the governance frameworks should be expedited. 
Institutional arrangements are pivotal to the success
=== PAGE 34 ===
32
of any sectorwide reforms as they are the vehicles for 
implementation of policies and strategies. Providing 
clarity regarding mandates, roles, and responsibilities 
is important to ensure effectiveness and efficiency. 
This is particularly so when capacity and resources 
are constrained. The Somalian institutional frame­
work for water governance is evolving and, through 
the development of the NWRS strategy, progress has 
been made in gaining improved alignment between 
the FGS and FMS ministries. Building on this will be 
a process to formalize these arrangements, through 
policy and legislative instruments.
The reality of the need for continued external 
funding of the water sector should not be a barrier 
to strengthening long-term institutional and techni­
cal capacity, and development programs should be 
aligned with the NWRS and contribute to country 
system strengthening. Flood and drought risk man­
agement measures, both ex-post response and ex-
ante flood prevention and mitigation measures, need 
strengthening as well as coordination between the 
MoEWR and the National Disaster Risk Manage­
ment actors. There is a need to manage drought and 
flood risks comprehensively in order to help develop 
resilience. Considering floods as a resource and op­
portunity should be encouraged, and Somalia should 
continue to invest in pathways to harness floods such 
as having sand and subsurface dams.
Before any sustainable large investment infrastruc­
ture is done, a policy intervention is needed relating 
to the defining of a clear urban service delivery model 
by the government, wherein the financing of large-
scale urban water supply and sanitation infrastructure 
is contingent on the development of a service delivery 
model for urban water and sanitation supply. The si­
multaneous development of an Urban Water Sector 
Investment Plan is very important. This can comprise 
a consolidation of a series of City Summary Invest­
Recommendations
A small-scale water vendor in Hargeisa, Somaliland. (Photo courtesy: Chantal Richey)
=== PAGE 35 ===
33
Recommendations
Figure 7. Water Insecurity Negatively Impacts Human Capital through Multiple Pathways
Headline Messages
Climate-Environment 
Vulnerability
Water security challenges are amplified by 
environmental degradation and climate change. 
Recurrent episodes of droughts and floods result 
in consecutive cycles of economic shock and 
recovery.
Poor Macroeconomic 
Performance
Environmental and climate shocks, 
import bans, and the global economic 
fall-out of the COVID-19 pandemic 
have resulted in a sluggish real GDP 
per capita growth for Somalia. This 
has been further dampened by the 
recent downward trend in foreign direct 
investments.
Reduced Water Sector 
Spending
Minuscule domestic revenue collection 
and capital expenditure, coupled with competing 
sectoral priorities, has resulted in Somalia’s 
water sector generally allocated only a small 
share of domestic revenue.
Increase in Inequality 
Inadequate water security increases 
inequality in the country and, subsequently, 
the vulnerability of certain social groups.
Human Capital 
Impacts
The lack of access to improved water supplies 
has long-term impacts on Somalia’s human capital 
across generations, affecting the health, skills, and 
knowledge of its citizens. Expanding access to 
improved water sources also has the potential to 
increase women’s participation in education and in 
the labor market.
Secure Rural 
Economy
Efforts to diversify and strengthen 
the urban economy may not achieve 
their intended impacts if they are not 
complemented by measures to secure 
the rural economy against long term 
environmental degradation and future 
economic and climatic shocks.
Need to Diversify 
Urban Economy
Somalia’s urban populations would benefit from 
economic diversification. Urban investments could 
generate large economic returns due to economies 
of scale and scope.
Forced Displacement + 
Rapid Urbanization
Forced displacement of rural populations as a result of economic and 
climatic shocks and environmental degradation is one of Somalia’s 
most prominent challenges.
01
04
02
03
07
06
08
05
=== PAGE 36 ===
34
ment Plans. While there is an urgent need to ease the 
burden on existing water delivery systems in urban 
areas, efforts need to be mindful of the considerable 
commercial interests by those currently filling the gap 
in service provision.
5.2 Priorities for Physical Investments 
and Capacity Strengthening
Investing in water generates high returns and this 
study sets out a broad suite of potential investments 
for the short and medium terms for rural, peri-urban, 
and urban areas. Whilst domestic revenue mobiliza­
tion and poor macroeconomic challenges persist, the 
reduced national water sector spending will continue 
to be a barrier for service delivery and the need for 
external funding remains essential. There is a need 
to channel external funding for service delivery in the 
sector, including investing in water infrastructure proj­
ects that can yield short-term returns. Such projects 
must support capacity strengthening, sustainability, 
and self-sufficiency. It is recommended that all invest­
ments into infrastructure fully integrate components 
related to building institutional and technical capacity 
in the water sector and insofar as is possible, par­
ticularly in rural Somalia, projects should be framed 
around community-driven development principles 
and sustainable land and water management.
Investments in water infrastructure need to reduce 
inequalities, for example, between different groups 
such as IDP/non-IDP and different cities, and be­
tween urban and rural. Where feasible, investments 
should have the potential to expand access to water 
for income-generating purposes and need to be pri­
oritized mindful of sudden long-term changes to ur­
ban populations that are likely to continue, such as 
the migration of people from rural to peri-urban areas.
When targeting investments, one should prioritize 
areas with low household water consumption and 
those that are particularly food insecure. Focus on 
supporting existing household investments that en­
able clean and reliable water supplies close to the 
home, as this has greatest impact on raising water 
consumption. Focus also on household sanitation 
as a step towards citywide inclusive sanitation. Not­
ing that education is one of the few assets that rural 
people can take when they move, prioritize improving 
WASH, including menstrual hygiene management in 
schools, as support to the education sector will have 
long-term returns.
Long-term food security is paramount for the social 
and economic development of Somalia. One must 
safeguard and increase the production of both staple 
foods and livestock fodder. Building resilience in ru­
ral Somalia requires investments that can reduce the 
impacts of droughts on nomadic and agro-pastoral 
communities. Water and land management practices, 
including soil conservation and flood management, 
are essential elements of all projects. New projects 
could emulate the Biyoole project model wherein 
sustainable land management is promoted around 
the construction of a water point. The securing of the 
rural economy and building resilience will reduce the 
forced displacement that comes with the repeated 
shocks that Somalia experiences, and water access 
is central in this resilience building. Finally, the live­
stock sector would benefit from securing all-year fod­
der, and there are gains to be made through water 
investments throughout the livestock value chain.
Livestock watering at a water point in Hudur Bakool. (Photo 
courtesy: Ahmed Mohamed Hassan)
Recommendations
=== PAGE 37 ===
35
Expanding access to improved water sources and, 
in particular, ensuring that sources are located close 
to the home, will reduce the time that women need 
to spend on water collection, freeing up their time 
for other activities and reducing their vulnerability to 
violence. Investment into girls’ education is extremely 
important for the economic and human development 
of the country, and WASH investments can play an 
important part in enabling girls to remain in school. 
Women have important roles to play in water man­
agement, which need to be very well supported.
5.3 Priorities for Filling 
Information and Data Gaps
Gaps in data and information prevent analysis of 
how water scarcity constrains economic prospects for 
households, firms, and the national economy. While 
the ‘Somalia Economics of Water’ study produced 
and analyzed an enormous amount of data, there re­
mains much to be done. The points below discuss pri­
orities for starting to fill the information and data gaps.
Understanding the role of the urban periphery in 
relation to why goods are not coming in from the hin­
terlands and defining the constraints to this in relation 
to water is, furthermore, important, as is also under­
standing why Somalia is importing staple vegetables 
such as onions and tomatoes from Ethiopia.
While not a water sector issue directly, the expan­
sion of enclosures creates conflict and threatens 
traditional livestock migration. The livestock sector, 
thus, also needs to be better understood and taken 
into consideration.
There is a need to ensure that investments priori­
tize the legal, political, cultural, and practical aspects 
of gender inequalities in Somalia as well as the col­
lection of gender-disaggregated data. 
It is also relevant to explore and introduce other 
technologies that are not found in Somalia. Manual 
well drilling is one of these technologies and the report 
recommends following the tried and tested model in 
FCV contexts: undertake an analytical study to under­
stand the development potential for manual well drill­
ing, if there is potential, then prepare and implement 
a small scale pilot project operation and, if success­
ful, take to scale in a large groundwater investment 
project; areas for intervention should be the areas 
without wadis and which are therefore unsuitable for 
sand dams. Projects of this nature will, in time, pro­
vide a network of emergency wells in drought-prone 
areas providing rural safety nets.
 An infrastructure assessment to understand the 
current state of the existing irrigation infrastructure is 
needed. This will determine if it is possible, and fea­
sible, to rehabilitate or construct new irrigation infra­
structure. A study of potential for spate irrigation can 
be done at the same time. More important, however, 
is the need to reinvent the riverine breadbasket and 
a quick win in the short term will be the introduction 
of farmer-led irrigation development (FLID) where the 
costs of irrigation are four times less than traditional 
irrigation and far easier to implement.
Understanding urban water supply and sanita­
tion is important. The ‘Somalia Economics of Water’ 
study has dug deeply into rural water supply and fu­
ture analytical work is required to position the sector 
for advancements in urban water supply and sanita­
tion. More information needs to be gathered on water 
Box 1. Data Scarcity
During the study, the paucity of published and 
consolidated data led to the project having the added 
benefit of becoming a producer and analyzer of data. 
The lack of data was a major constraint throughout the 
study, and data constraints affect many of the areas 
and variables that would prove very insightful for an 
economic assessment of how water scarcity impacts on 
economic prospects, both at the macroeconomic and 
microeconomic levels. Data constraints are described 
in depth in Appendix 3 of the full report.
Recommendations
=== PAGE 38 ===
36
service delivery for human consumption in cities and 
towns and for commercial and industrial users. Criti­
cal in this is deepening understanding of large-scale 
extraction and storage to facilitate the preparation of 
urban investment in water supply. Unpacking the role 
of water utilities is key and little is currently known 
about the basics such as contracting modalities, fi­
nancing sources, governing policies, and fiscal risks. 
5.4 Short- and Medium-Term Projects
Based on the premise of learning by doing and 
a recognition that, in Somalia, tangible projects fa­
cilitate intergovernmental coordination and sectoral 
oversight, the tables below provide a list of invest­
ment priorities based on the analysis undertaken 
by this ‘Economics of Water’ study. The priorities 
presented in Tables 2 and 3 correspond to the short 
term (0–2 years) and medium term (0–5 years), re­
spectively. The priorities are disaggregated by rural, 
peri-urban, and urban; alignments with the particular 
NWRS flagship projects are given.
Table 2. List of Investment Priorities: Short Term (0–2 Years)
Suggested Formulation	
Timeframe	
Focus	
Alignment with
	
	
	
	
	
NWRS Flagship
	
	
	
	
	
Project #
Strengthen resilience at the local level
Investment in new small water systems/expansion, including 	
Short	
Rural	
3, 7, 8, 10, 12
innovations (for example, sand dams) coupled with appropriate
governance and management arrangements 
Build a network of emergency wells in vulnerable localities 	
Short	
Rural	
8
Provide technical assistance/co-funding for soil and 	
Short	
Rural	
8, 7, 10
water conservation techniques in selected areas
Provide technical assistance/co-funding for private and 	
Short	
Rural	
4
community investments in water 
Strengthen local community capacity (1): rehabilitation of 	
Short	
Rural	
3, 7, 12
watering facilities with support for the reestablishment and 
strengthening of nomadic communities’ organization, 
including conflict adjudication
...continued on facing page
Elevated tank in Aleybadey. (Photo courtesy: Ahmed 
Mohamed Hassan)
Recommendations
=== PAGE 39 ===
37
Suggested Formulation	
Timeframe	
Focus	
Alignment with
	
	
	
	
	
NWRS Flagship
	
	
	
	
	
Project #
...continued from facing page
Table 2. List of Investment Priorities: Short Term (0–2 Years)
Improve data, information, and knowledge
River flow assessments, based on a combination of 	
Short	
All	
6, 7, 9, 11
past data and hydrological modeling utilizing remote sensing 
data (including upstream basin sections in Ethiopia)  
Research studies/further diagnostics on:
•	 Delivery models, sources and access for select urban areas 
	
as basis of taking decisions in future service delivery
•	 Boosting year-round affordable good quality livestock feed
•	 How to best support the promotion of water and soil 
	
conservation and water harvesting methods in drylands
•	 How to support integrated land and water management 
	
practices, including soil conservation and flood management
•	 Viable flood mitigation and drought resilience measures 
	
including forest stewardship
•	 Climate-resilient water and sanitation technologies and 
	
management techniques
These studies should be embedded in, and undertaken as part 	
Short	
All	
5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12
of, investment operations
Economic studies on sectoral water uses (mostly WSS, livestock, 	 Short	
All	
7, 9, 10, 12
and agriculture) but also on new trends of energy conversion 
efforts and incipient industrial development
Assessment of the potential use of economic incentives for 	
Short	
All	
5, 9
sustainable water management (mainly pricing mechanisms, 
risk management schemes, and cooperation-based instruments)
Undertake an in-depth diagnostic of the existing water supply 	
Short 	
Urban	
7, 9
and sanitation facilities in capital and secondary cities. The 
focus should be on clearly defined sources of water, and how to 
collect, store, and deliver
Urban Investment Plans (1): 	
Short	
Urban	
3, 7, 9
Deepen analysis of 23 most distressed towns in terms of water 
resources towns to determine growth potential of, and 
inequalities in, and define key urban water infrastructure 
investment priorities 
Urban Investment Plans (2): 	
Short	
Urban	
3, 7, 9
Prepare secondary city summary investment plans for 
Galmudug, South West State, Hirshabelle, and Jubbaland
Recommendations
=== PAGE 40 ===
38
Suggested Formulation	
Timeframe	
Focus	
Alignment with
	
	
	
	
	
NWRS Flagship
	
	
	
	
	
Project #
Table 3. List of Potential Investments for the Medium Term (0–5 Years)
...continued on facing page
Recommendations
Strengthen resilience at the local level
Develop perennial livestock feed crops that utilize ‘green water’, 	
Medium	
Rural	
7, 12
but at times have blue river water added (supplemental irrigation). 
This would form the basis for high-quality livestock export 
(well-fed, healthy livestock, selling at good prices) 
Introduce consultative, participatory approaches whereby water 	
Medium	
Rural	
7, 12
access helps livestock stakeholders through participatory 
rangeland management and improves environmental 
stewardship of rangelands, including their adaptation to an 
increasingly threatening climate change
Transforming livelihoods and the economy
Large scale introduction of manual well drilling (training, local 	
Medium	
All	
5, 9
equipment production, private sector development) 
Promote farmer-led irrigation development	
Medium	
Rural	
10
Provision of large volumes of water to enable the gradual 	
Medium	
Rural, 	
7, 10
commercialization of Jubba and Shabelle (river flow dependent)	
	
Peri-urban 
agriculture, from low-value crops to higher-value crops
Pilot locally based Natural Resources Management and 	
Medium	
Rural	
8, 10, 11
Water Resources Management including soil rehabilitation
Connect urban and rural provision of water for households, which 	 Medium	
Rural	
7, 9
may entail interventions and deeper assessments as per the 
optimal scale for the provision of these services by specialized 
water utilities or other operators (in cooperation with 
community-based systems)
Connect water supply and wastewater treatment, thus making the 	 Medium	
Rural	
9
best out of the potential for reclaiming and reusing water
In coastal towns, pilot mixed source water provision through 	
Medium	
Urban	
9
complementing fresh groundwater with desalination such as 
reverse osmosis options
=== PAGE 41 ===
39
Suggested Formulation	
Timeframe	
Focus	
Alignment with
	
	
	
	
	
NWRS Flagship
	
	
	
	
	
Project #
...continued from facing page
Table 3. List of Potential Investments for the Medium Term (0–5 Years)
Improve data, information and knowledge
Deepen transboundary basin knowledge and understanding:	
Medium	
Rural	
2, 3, 5, 6
•	 Establish a basis for transboundary basin management
•	 Undertake situation assessment and basin development 
	
scenario studies in the Jubba and Shabelle basins
•	 Undertake situation assessment and basin development 
	
scenario studies in transboundary aquifers
•	 Develop principles and policy for transboundary cooperation 
	
and basin management
•	 Promote trust building activities towards transboundary basin 
	
management across the region
A policy intervention is needed relating to the defining of a 	
Medium	
Urban	
9
clear urban service delivery model by government
Urban Investment Plans (3):
Develop an overarching Urban Water Sector Investment Plan	
Medium	
Urban	
4, 9
Recommendations
=== PAGE 42 ===
40
Bibliography
•	 Auerbach, Alan J., and L.J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dy­
namic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press. 
•	 Basnyat, D.B. 2007. Water Resources of Soma­
lia. Technical Report No W-11. Nairobi, Kenya: 
FAO SWALIM (GCP/SOM/045/EC). https://www.
faoswalim.org/resources/site_files/W-11%20
Water%20Resources%20of%20Somalia_0.pdf
•	 Gaur M.K., and V.R. Squires. 2018. Geographic 
Extent and Characteristics of the World’s Arid 
Zones and Their Peoples. In M. Gaur, V. Squires, 
eds., Climate Variability Impacts on Land Use and 
Livelihoods in Drylands. Springer, Cham. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56681-8_1
•	 EarthWater. 1998. Pre-feasibility Geophysical in­
vestigations. Garowe Town Water Supply. Punt­
land State, Somalia.
•	 FAO, AQUASTAT. 2014. Country profile Somalia. 
Retrieved January 8, 2021, from http://www.fao.
org/aquastat/en/countries-and-basins/country-
profiles/country/SOM
•	 FAO and WB (Food and Agriculture Organization 
and the World Bank). 2018. Rebuilding Resilient 
and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia. Washing­
ton, D.C. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/803231522165074948/Volume-1-Overview 
•	 FGS (Federal Government of Somalia). 2018. 
Drought Impact and Needs Assessment. Mogadi­
shu, Somalia.
•	 Khandker V., V.P. Gandhi, and N. Johnson. 2020. 
“Gender Perspective in Water Management: The 
Involvement of Women in Participatory Water Insti­
tutions of Eastern India”. Water 12(1):196. https://
doi.org/10.3390/w12010196
•	 Liniger, H., and W. Critchley. 2007. Where the land 
is greener: Case-studies and analysis of soil and 
water conservation initiatives worldwide. CTA/
CDE/FAO/UNEP/WOCAT.
•	 Louis Berger Inc. 1985. Comprehensive ground­
water development, project 104. Final report Vol­
ume II, Hydrology. Somali Democratic Republic, 
Ministry of Minerals and Water resources, Water 
Development Agency.
•	 Lundqvist, J. 1999. Mainstreaming Gender in 
Water Resources Management: Why and how. 
Background Paper for the World Vision Process. 
Accessed May 7, 2021. Available at http://www.
pacificwater.org/userfiles/file/IWRM/Toolboxes/
gender/MAINSTREAMING%20GENDER%20
IN%20WATER%20RESOURCES.pdf
•	 MoEWR. 2021. Water Resources Strategy and 
Plan. Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, 
Federal Government of Somalia.
•	 National Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Somalia Gross 
Domestic Product Report. Mogadishu, Somalia. 
https://www.nbs.gov.so/gross-domestic-product-
gdp/
•	 Petersen, G., and H.M. Gadain. 2012. Water 
Demand Assessment for the Juba and Sha­
belle Rivers. Technical Report No W-22, FAO-
SWALIM (GCP/SOM/049/EC) Project, Nairobi, 
Kenya. https://www.faoswalim.org/resources/site_
files/W%2022%20Water%20Demand%20Assess­
ment_0.pdf
•	 Rubel, F., and M. Kottek. 2010. “Observed and pro­
jected climate shifts 1901–2100 depicted by world 
maps of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification.” 
Meteorologische Zeitschrift 19(2): 135–141.
•	 Said, A.A., R. Yurtal, M. Cetin, and M.S. Gölpinar. 
2021. “Evaluation of some groundwater quality pa­
rameters using geostatistics in the urban coastal 
aquifer of Bosaso plain, Somalia.” Journal of Agri­
cultural Sciences. https://dergipark.org.tr/en/down­
load/article-file/794340
•	 Shilenje, Z.W., and V. Ongoma. 2014. “Observed 
surface ozone trend in the year 2012 over Nairobi, 
Kenya.” Atmósfera 27(4): 377–384.
=== PAGE 43 ===
41
•	 Tierney, J.E., C.C. Ummenhofer, and P.B. de 
Menocal. 2015. “Past and future rainfall in the 
Horn of Africa.” Sci. Adv. 1, e1500682. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/283851190_Past_
and_future_rainfall_in_the_Horn_of_Africa
•	 UNICEF. 2011. MICS Somaliland, 2011.
•	 van Haren, I., L. Bastidas, N. Limones, and M. Wi­
jnen. 2017. Assessment of Water Resources for 
Priority Areas in Somaliland. Final Report. Somalia 
Drought Emergency Response. Water Partnership 
Program, World Bank Group.
•	 van Wijk-Sijbesma, C. 1998. Gender in Water Re­
sources Management, Water Supply and Sanita­
tion: Roles and Realities Revisited. International 
Research Centre for Water and Sanitation. Delft, 
The Netherlands.
•	 WASH Cluster Somalia. Draft 2017. Minimum 
WASH 
Technical 
Guidelines. 
180502_wash_
technical_guidelines_2017.pdf 
(humanitarianre­
sponse.info)
•	 WHO and UNICEF. 2019. Progress on Drinking 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and 
SDG Baseline. WHO & UNICEF, Joint Monitoring 
Programme, Geneva and New York. 
•	 ———. 2021. Estimates for drinking water, sanita­
tion and hygiene services by country (2000–2020). 
Updated July 2021. Accessed July 15, 2021. www.
washdata.org 
•	 World Bank. 2018. Somalia Drought Impact and 
Needs Assessment. Volume II: Sector reports.
•	 ———. 2021a. Somalia Urbanization Review: Fos­
tering Cities as Anchors of Development. Wash­
ington, D.C. https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/35059 
•	 ———. 2021b. Horn of Africa Regional Econom­
ic Memorandum: Overview Report. Washington, 
D.C.
•	 ———. 2021c. Gender Gaps in Somalia’s Water 
Sector. Washington, D.C.
•	 World 
Bank 
Group. 
2020. 
Domestic 
Re­
source Mobilization in Somalia. Washington, 
D.C. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/644541596773094934/Domestic-Resource-
Mobilization-in-Somalia 
•	 ———. 2021a. Improving Access to Jobs for the 
Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia. Washington, 
D.C. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/540261609935995160/Improving-Access-to-
Jobs-for-the-Poor-and-Vulnerable-in-Somalia 
•	 ———. 2021b. Trade as and Engine of Growth in 
Somalia: Constraints and Opportunities. Washing­
ton, D.C.
•	 ———. 2021c. Somalia Country Economic Mem­
orandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda. 
Washington, 
D.C. 
http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/464291625747249500/Somalia-
Economic-Memorandum-Towards-an-Inclusive-
Jobs-Agenda
Bibliography
=== PAGE 44 ===

=== PAGE 45 ===

=== PAGE 46 ===
Notes
=== PAGE 47 ===

=== PAGE 48 ===
GWSP
GLOBAL WATER
SECURITY a SANITATION
PARTNERSHIP
THE WORLD BANK
I WORLD BANKGROUP
IBRD • IDA
