=== PAGE 1 ===
Federal Governtment of Somalia
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources.
SOMALI ELECTRICITY ACCESS PROJECT
FINAL REPORT
=== PAGE 2 ===
IIENTS
Foreword by MoEWR
Foreword by KTH
Abbreviations
2
3
4
4.2
4.3
5
Introduction
Background of the study
Scope and objectives of the study
Current status of the electricity access sector in Somalia
Institutional structure and sector policies
Status of the existing electricity provision in Somalia
Potential electrification supply options
Results of the geospatial electrification analysis
"Business as usual" - separate mini-grids and stand-alone PV technologies only
The potential of a national centralized grid electricity network
Sensitivity analysis
Concluding remarks
Reference list
Appendix A - Geospatial mapping of buildings and population
Appendix B - Residential electricity demand process
Appendix C - Productive and social electricity demand process
Appendix D - Geospatial electrification model
Appendix E - Dato collection
Appendix F - Sensitivity analysis of electrification scenarios
Appendix G - Main scenario results per region
Appendix H - Potential priority locations
Appendix I - Spatial Dato Infrastructure
3
3
4
7
10
10
14
19
20
22
25
28
32
47
50
57
62
64
66
ESMAP
ESP
FGS
FRS
FMS
GDP
GIS
GWh
kWh
LCoE
LV
MG
MoEWR
MV
MWh
NDP
OR-VI
OnSSET
PMP
SA
SDI
SDG7
USD
Wp
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
Energy Service Providers
Federal Government of Somalia
Federal Republic of Somalia
Federal Member States
Gross Domestic Product
Geospatial Information System
Gigawatt hour
High voltage
Kilowatt hour
Levelized cost of electricity
Low voltage
Mini-grid
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
Medium voltage
Megawatt
Megawatt hour
Somalia National Development Plon
Operation and maintenance
Open Source Spatial Electrification Tool
Power Moster Plan
Photovoltaic
Stand-alone
Spatial Dato Infrastructure
Sustainable Development Gool 7
United States Dollar
Watt-peak
!--JII
=== PAGE 3 ===
Foreword by MoEWR
The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, mandated
on regulating and governing the Federal Government of
Somalia's energy sector, is engaged in the development
of the main policy and legal frameworks necessary for
the fulfilment of the ongoing sector reform, including the
Energy Policy and the Electricity Act. Under the above
function, the Ministry is currently implementing the
Somalia Electricity Access project (SEAP), supported by
the World Bonk, which includes the provision of analytic
work studies for enabling electrification through solar
powered and hybrid mini grids. Under this component, an
indicative least-cost geospatial electrification plan was
prepared by KTH in collaboration with Kartoza and Recon
to support the work towards universal access to
electricity in Somalia,
The accomplishment of this plan is key for promoting and
facilitating investments into the sector. While the
aspirations for country-wide access and the national grid
infrastructure development seemed very noble objective
to catering for the overall policy objective of
Electrification and access to affordable and reliable
energy for all, as stipulated by the Energy policy,
The Ministry, in collaboration with the private sector and
the sector stakeholders, is to develop an investment plan
for the sector with the aim of developing formidable
energy infrastructure based on the data developed
under the least-cost geospatial electrification plan.
The Minister of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR) of
the Federal Republic of Somalia stressed the efforts with
the development partners for the ongoing energy sector
reform support to go forward to resist and purse,
This plan is key for promoting and
facilitating investments into the
sector.
iii
OUR MISSION
DEVELOPMENT OF
—ESUSTAINABLE
SOCIETIES THROUGH
ROBUSTAND
TRANSPARENT
AND
RESOURCE SYSTEMS
RESEARCH AND
—TRAINING.
.S.iG
Foreword by KTH
KTH division of Energy Systems (KTH-dES) is a research division
at KTH Royal Institute of Technology. The research at KTH-dES is
based on o brood system perspective, where energy technology,
innovation, and policy are linked to sustainable development, We
develop quantitative models for optimizing energy systems and
develop the basis for strategic decisions on investments, as well
os policy, Our mission is to support the development of
sustainable societies through robust ond transparent energy
and resource systems research and training,
In collaborating with Kartoza ond Recon, we provided on
ensemble team with expertise in open source geospatial
application development and training, electrification planning,
and in-situ knowledge of the electrification sector in Somalia.
The result of the collaboration between the project partners, the
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, the World Bonk/ESMAP
and local stakeholders and electrification practitioners in
Somalia is a least-cost electrification model for Somalia, an SDI
(Spatial Dota Infrastructure) and on electrification modelling
platform for visualizing the model results, This platform aims to
facilitate the critical work taking place to support the meeting of
the Sustainable Development Goal 7 which seeks to ensure that
access to electricity is ubiquitous,
The electrification analysis was led by KTH (Andreas Sahlberg,
Babak Khavari, Nandi Moksnes and Francesco Fuso-Nerini), the
SDI and visualization platform was set up by Kartoza (Tim
Sutton, Irwan Foturrahman, Admire Nyakudya and Charles
Dixon-paver) and the data collection was led by Recon Energy
(Aden Abdi and Mohamud Ibrahim Abdullahi). Throughout the
project, the MoEWR team and the World Bank team hove
provided invaluable support ond inputs, os hos the federal
ministries, federal member states and ESPs that have provide
much of the data,
KTH does not guarantee the accuracy of the dato included in this
work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the port of KTH concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries,
Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a
limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities of KTH,
oll of which are specifically reserved
iv
=== PAGE 4 ===
1 Introduction
1.1 Background of the study
Adequate access to reliable electricity and energy is widely regarded as one of the main drivers of
economic growth, Access to energy in general, and electricity in particular, will therefore be crucial in
order to address the current challenges faced by Somalia, During recent years, strides hove been token
towards universal electricity access, but a large share of the population still suffers from limited access
to energy (this includes electricity as well as other energy sources such as biomass and fossil fuels),
Many energy suppliers in the country have not been able to l<eep up with the growing energy demand
during recent decodes. This can be attributed partly to the instabilities plaguing the country, which has
slowed economic growth and complicated investments [1], The country currently does not have a
central national power grid. Instead, the private sector supplies around 90% of the power available in
urban and peri-urban settlements, mostly using mostly diesel-based mini-grid systems of between 500
I<VA and 5,000 kVA Each mini-grid creates an island network targeting a specific urban center [1],
Various sources report that approximately one-third of the population in Somalia is currently
estimated to have access to electricity. According to the 2020 Tracking SDG7 report, electricity access
stood ot 35% in 2018, (60% in urban areas and 15% in rural areas) [2], Dota collected for the Power
Master Plan provided an estimate on the number of ESP customers, i.e. households connected to
mini-grids, Based on surveyed ESPs across 26 locations and extrapolation of access rates to locations
not surveyed, 606,000 households in Somalia were estimated to be connected in 2018 (28% of
households in the country), There was a significant difference found between different population
groups, with urban access significantly higher than for other groups[ An estimated 485,000 of the
customers were in urban areas, 88,000 in rural areas and 34,000 customers in IDP areas. The nomadic
population was assumed not to be connected to ESPs,] In addition to electricity supply from
mini-grids, World Bonk research estimates that 100,000-150,000 off-grid solar products are sold
annually in the country, However, some of these products are of lower quality which could undermine
future adoption of off-grid solar products [4],
1.2 Scope and objectives of the study
The objective of this study was to provide an indicative least-cost geospatial electrification plan to
support the work towards universal access to electricity in Somalia, The analysis has been structured
to reflect the Power Master Plan and the Government's sector priorities for regional and national
development through 2030 and generate indicative investment financing requirements for the next
five years (2020-2025) along with approximate requirements through 2030. The geospatial
electrification analysis was undertaken to examine different options for electrification in Somalia
through to 2030, to provide the necessary data to support robust decision-making in the Somali
electricity sector. In addition to this report, a visualization platform and Spatial Data Infrastructure
(SD!) has been set up to facilitate the exploration and discussion around electrification options, as well
as data storage and management to support future updates of the analysis and the strategies
deriving from it, Finally, a series of stakeholder consultations and workshops including both private and
public stakeholders in the Somali electricity sector were undertaken to account for the information,
data and views of the different stakeholders,
1 An estimated 485,000 of the customers were in urban oreos, 88,000 in rural oreos and 34,000 customers in IDP oreos. The nomadic
population was assumed not to be connected to ESPs.
2020 Tracking SDG7 report
electricity access stood ot 35% in 2018,
in urban areas
in rural areas
=== PAGE 5 ===
2 Current status of the electricity access sector in Somalia
2.1 Institutional structure and sector policies
Despite Somalia's history of protracted conflict, its private sector has shown entrepreneurship and
resilience, and succeeded in maintaining economic activity in a challenging environment. In the absence
of an electric grid, privately owned and operated diesel-powered mini-grids were developed, which
provide nearly all of Somalia's electricity Each network is operated by an Energy Service Provider
(ESP) who is in charge of the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity as well as
collecting tariffs from costumers, This means that each ESP owns and operates a complete chain from
electricity generation to distribution to the end-users [3].
In some of the larger cities, more than one ESP is present. These ESPs operate in isolation, which has
caused duplicate distributions networks in the same area lower potential for synchronous generation,
The Power Master Plan points to technical standards and cooperation between ESPs as potential
solutions to increase both generation and distribution efficiency in the power sector. Currently Somalia
has one of the highest electricity prices in the world, due in part to a highly fragmented power sector
In order to speed up the process of increasing energy access the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS)
has introduced policies targeting private sector involvement in the energy sector, The FGS has also
created the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MOEWR), The mission of the MOEWR is to provide
reliable, adequate and accessible clean energy and water resources to the country, The MoEWR hos the
overarching responsibility for policies, rules and standards of the power sector in Somalia, and firms
should register with the MoEWR to operate in the electricity market in Somalia. Furthermore, the
MoEWR works with counterparts in the Federal Member State governments, mandated with the
responsibility for energy initiatives in the electricity sector in the respective states
Access to energy in general, and electricity in particular, has been identified as one of the crucial
components for economic growth in the latest notional development plan (Somalia National
Development Plan 2020-2024) [1]. Furthermore, Somalia has recently created a Power Master Plan. The
Power Master Plan outlines a strategy for increased electricity generation, increased supply of
renewable energy and the development of a regulatory framework to improve market efficiency in the
power sector The MoEWR is also engaged in developing a national Energy Policy and Energy Act.
The Final National Energy Policy with the main goal to "provide adequate, affordable and sustainable
access to efficient energy to the Somali society", identifies a need for regulation and policies to
encourage investments in the power sector, increase access and energy security [5].
The Draft Energy Policy has six main objectives, of which the first is Access To Electrical Energy, This
objective is defined as to 'iincrease access to efficient, affordable and sustainable energy for urban and
rural communities: for the private sector to thrive, as well as for the public sector to meet its energy
demand in order to provide better essential services, boost economic growth and reduce poverty". Key
strategies aim among other things at increased efficiency in existing systems, increased use of
renewable energies with particular focus on solar PVV promoting high-quality products, rural
electrification schemes and strengthening of institutions
2.2 Status of the existing electricity provision in Somalia
An updated data collection exercise was undertal<en in this project to gather further information on
customers, demand levels ond technology costs from ESPs in Somalia, The MoEWR, the consultants,
the World Bonk, the five Federal Member States and 32 ESPs hove provided their support in collecting
and/or providing data on mini-grids in Somalia. Additional information on existing mini-grid locations
were collected from the Power Master Plan, reports and online sources, Through this process, mini-grids
could be identified in 103 locations across Somalia, their locations displayed in Figure 1, and
summarized per region in Table 1, Detailed information was provided by the ESPs for 38 of these
locations. Note that some of the locations are served by more than one ESP, and not all ESPs in these
locations may have been surveyed or provided information in this project or for the Power Master Plan.
Table 1. Mini-grid locations identified per region
Region
Awdal
Bakool
Banaadir
Bari
Bay
Galguduug
Gedo
Hiiraon
Jubbada Dhexe
Jubbada Hoose
Mudug
Nugaal
Saaxil
Sanoag
Shabellaha Dhexe
Shabellaha Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Waqoyi Galbeed
Mini-grid locations identified
Bakit Boon, Borama, Dilla, Garba Dadar, Geerisa, Lawya Caddo, Quljeed,
Xariirad, Zeylac (10)
Ceel Bordet Xudur, Waojid (3)
Mogadishu (1)
Bosaso, Carmo, Ceeldahir, Qardho, Yaka Yaka (5)
Baidoa, BeerdQle, BuurhokQbQ, Diinsoor, Qansax Dheere (5)
Balanbale, Cabudwaaq, Cadaado, Dhuusamareeb, Godin Labe, Guri-Ceel (6)
Baardhere, Balad Hawo, Buurdhuubo, Doolow, El Wok, Garbahaarey, Luuq (7)
Beledweynet Bulo Burto, Buq-Aqoble, Holgan, Jalolaqsi, Maxaos (6)
Jilib
Afmadow, Dhobley, Kismaayo, Qoqani (4)
Abaoreyt Bacoadweynt Bandiirodley, Bursaolax, Galkayo, Galdogob, Xarfo (7)
Burtinle, Eyl, Garoowe (3)
Bernbera, Bulloxaar, Sheikh(S)
Badhon, Ceel Afweyin, Ceerigaobo, Gar Adog, Hadaoftimo, Xin-Galool (6)
Balcad, Hawadley, Jowhar, Qalimoq, Warshiil<h (5)
Afgooye, Baroawe, Marko, Qoruooley, Wanlaweyn (5)
Coynobo, Loascoanood, Dog, Toleex, Xudun (5)
Bali Dhiig, Burco, Buuhoodle, Dodweyne, Qorilugud, Xaaji Saalax (6)
Abaarso, Alleybadey, Arabsiyo, Aw Barl<hadle, Baligubadle, Balli Cabane,
Dacorbudhuq, Darosaloam, Faroweyne, Gebiley, Hargeysa, Kalobeydh,
Madheera, Salahley, Wajaale (15)
=== PAGE 6 ===
Djibouti
Am-Ot J
/ Dire
Dawa
/ Harar
haa /
Cheratl
Togdheer
Sonaog
S09 Jp
doosaaso
Qardho
Nugoaj
Laascaanood
Somoh
Mudug
/ Gode
o S%omaaliya
Bele
Hnraan O
k BokocOJ*S1e
Mini-grid customer per state
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
Galmudug Hirshabelle Jubolond Mogadishu
Puntland Southwest
Estimated household customers in unserveyed locations
Household customers from ESP surveys
Somaliland
rbahaoey O
Baydhabo
rondero
Gedo
Baardheere
Ohexe
AN ESTIMATED
4.0 OUT OF 15.9 MILLION
PEOPLE IN SOMALIA
HAS ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY
FROM MINI-GRIDS IN 2020
60'/01..'
MuqdlåhQ)
Jubboda
Dhexe
0
0
Jubbado
Hoose
-IA.c
MV and LV distibubon
Only LV distributon
r Inn
Ill
These mini grids differ in both size and distribution and
generation technologies, The smallest ESPs serve only a
few hundred households, while the largest serve tens of
thousands of households in a single location, Mini-grids
were most commonly found in the larger cities and
towns in Somalia [1], Based on the collected data, an
estimated 4.0 out of 15,9 million people in Somalia
(identified through satellite imagery) has access to
electricity from mini-grids in 2020 Figure 2 provides
the estimated number of households customers per
state,
This number should be taken as indicative only, as there ore some locations that were not surveyed in
either of the projects, The largest uncertainties are seen in Somaliland, where data was not collected
through this project, and Mogadishu where information was incomplete with regards both to total
number of customers as well as the split between residential and non-residential customers,
Figure 2, Estimated number of households served by ESPs per region based on survey data
from the SEAP project and the Power Master Plan
As mentioned above, ESPs face challenges in generation
capacity especially in peri-urban and rural oreos, During
the workshops held within this project, participants
suggested that the uptake of solar energy and other
renewable sources in the power generation might play a
major role in filling thot gap. While the majority of
generation is currently supplied by diesel generators,
there are already examples of solar photovoltaics (PV)
implementation in some mini-grids around the country,
and ot least one mini-grid using wind-power
Further details on generation capacity ond distribution
options derived from the collected data are displayed in
Table 3. A total of 106 MW of generation capacity has
been reported from the ESPs that provided information
for this project, of which more thon 90% is diesel-based
and the remaining comes from solar PV, It should be
noted that actual currently installed capacity is higher,
as information for some location were not provided, and
Somaliland dato has not been collected
1 The doto collection exercise hos identified mini-grids in 17 cities with o population of more than 50,000 people, 39 settlements with o
population between 10,000 and 50,000 people, 42 settlements with o population between 1,000 ond 10,000 people ond 5 settlements with o
population of less than 1000 people. The geospatial population doto derives from satellite mopping of buildings in Somalia, identifying
building counts for both moin urban oreos and remote rural locations. The process of creating the building and population doto is further
described in Appendix A.
2 Survey information collected in this project and for the Power Master Plon combined encompasses approximately 363,000 mini-grid
connected households. Furthermore, an estimated 313,000 households ore served in un-surveyed locations, for o total estimate of 676,000
mini-grid household customers in Somalia in 2020
=== PAGE 7 ===
Table 2. Installed capacity and distribution information provided by ESPs
Galmudug Hirshabelle Jubaland Banaadir Puntland
Generation
Distribution
Wind (I<W)
Diesel (I<W)
HV (km)
MV (km)
LV (km)
11,500
1,000
8,100
35
233
15,653
48
440
8,004
26,230
232
770
2,804
750
17,463
65
503
South West
16,240
50
273
Total
11,808
750
95,186
430
2,226
Demand estimation - The next step of the analysis was to determine the electricity demand for each
settlement, based on population settlements and locations of the priority service delivery facilities,
Three demand scenarios were developed for the residential demand: one low, one medium and one
high demand based on information on current demand collected from ESPs and household targets
from the Power Master Plan, More information on the residential demand analysis can be found in
Appendix B, Public demand loads were assigned to primary and secondary schools os well as health
posts, health facilities ond hospitals, relating to the appliances thot con be found in such facilities,
Finally, electricity demand for agricultural irrigation was identified. More details on the estimation of
electricity demand for public an productive loads are determined Appendix C.
Comparison of electricity supply options - The final step of the analysis was to identify for each
location, which electricity supply technology can meet the electricity demand at the lowest cost. The
cost of each technology in each location is dependent on locally available energy resources, demand
loads, techno-economic porometers and distances to existing infrastructure, For this study, five
different technology configurations were considered (see Table 4), Appendix D provides further
information on how OnSSET determines the least-cost technology, and Appendix E on the input data
used in the model for this study,
Toble 3. The five technology configuration options considered in the OnSSET model for increased
access to electricity in Somalia by 2030, The five technologies are further divided into three
categories: grid, mini-grid and stand-alone systems.
3 Potential electrification supply options
The importance of integrated approaches to energy planning has started to become more frequent
and adopted by policy makers and planners, In order to reach universal electricity there is a need for
change in the current energy paradigm, Most energy systems are currently relying on centralized
distribution options, but these are not always economically viable to extent to remote settlements far
away from the transmission backbones and therefore these settlements remain unelectrified,
Decentralized solutions such as mini-grids and stand-alone options may be able to fill the gap left by
the grid, The emergence of decentralized technology configuration means that there are now multiple
options available in order to increase the access to electricity, This makes inclusive planning
approaches such as Integrated Energy Pathways (IEP) very important [7]. A geospatially mapped
least-cost electrification plan is a useful tool when detailing high-level electricity rollout plans on local,
national or regional levels, Using different types of geospatial tools can assist in generating
economically viable electrification plans providing affordable electricity to people across a study area
A geospatial electrification analysis was carried out using the Open Source Spatial Electrification Tool
(OnSSET) to help identify least-cost electrification options for increased access to electricity in Somalia,
OnSSET identifies the least-cost electricity technology-configuration to accomplish access for all
settlements in a country drawing on a set of geospatial, demographic and techno-economic data, The
methodology can be briefly divided into three steps:
Identification of settlements and priority service delivery facilities - The first step of the analysis was
to identify population settlements and priority service delivery facilities (schools, health facilities, water
points and potential agricultural irrigation loads). Drawing on satellite-based building counts, Q
geospatial population dataset was produced with each settlement in the country, from single buildings
to major urban centers, The process of creating this population layer is described in detail in Appendix
A, The locations of schools, health facilities, water points and agricultural harvest areas were collected
with the support of Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education, Ministry of Health and Ministry
of Agriculture and matched to the population settlements, which form the basis of the geospatial
analysis, In total, information on 2,549 schools, 799 health facilities and 4,840 water points were
collected,
Category
Grid-connection (Grid)
Mini-grid systems (MG)
Definition
Connection to o future potential national grid.
A system with its own distribution network
operating independently of the notional grid
serving multiple customers
Stand-alone systems (SA) An energy system serving one single customer.
Supply technology
National Grid
PV/Diesel hybrid
Wind/Diesel Hybrid
Hydropower
Solar PV (Solar Home Systems)
Electrification options and costs are highly dependent on the distance to existing and planned energy
infrastructure, Through a geospatial analysis of mini-grid locations and population settlement, we
found that 40% of the population in Somalia lives within one of the 103 identified mini-grid locations,
Figure 3 shows the settlements within 5 (orange) and 10 km (blue) of the existing mini-grids in 2020,
Furthermore, Table 2 below presents the share of the population within 5 and 10 km of existing
mini-grids and existing MV line locations,
=== PAGE 8 ===
o
75 150 km
Population settlements
Within 5 km of closest mini-grid
Within 10 km of closest mini-grid
Figure 3. Settlements within 5 and 10 of existing mini-grids,
Table 4, Population living in proximity of existing mini-grids and medium-voltage lines.
Energy Infrastructure
Existing mini-grids
Existing MV locations
Population within 5 km
Population within 10 km
Different scenarios were developed to study potential pathways to increase electricity access in
Somalia and to help guide investments in the sector. These include scenarios based on mini-grids and
stand-alone PV technologies only, as well as scenarios considering the development of a national
transmission backbone, drawing on options designed for the Power Master Plan, The scenarios were
developed to explore a wide range of possible developments and their costs, These scenarios were also
subject to sensitivity analysis with regards to five key drivers; demand growth, intensification strategy,
distribution costs, PV panel costs and diesel fuel costs. See Appendix F for information on scenarios and
sensitivity analysis,
4 Results of the geospatial electrification analysis
This section presents the results for Q 'ibusiness-os-usual" scenario, as well as key insights from
alternative electrification pathways studied and the sensitivity analysis, A full sensitivity analysis on
investment costs with regards to demand, PV cost, diesel cost, intensification strategy and distribution
technology costs is found in Appendix F.
4.1 "Business as usual" - separate mini-grids and stand-alone PV
technologies only
In the business-as-usual scenario, only stand-alone PV ond mini-grids are included os potential
technology configuration for least-cost electrification, Each location is evaluated separately, i,e, there
is no interconnection of different locations where mini-grids are found to be the least-cost technology
(Figure 4), This represents a scale-up of the current setup of the electricity sector in Somalia, Note that
oll the numbers presented in the results section refer to the total population connected to each
technology by 2030, inclusive of the population that already hos access to electricity as well os the new
connections,
Figure 4, Areos where mini-grids are identified as the least-cost technology to meet the electricity
demand in red, and areas where stand-alone PV are identified as least-cost technology in yellow.
In this coset Q rapid ramp-up of stand-alone PV deployment is required to achieve universal electricity
access in Somalia, However, mini-grids remain the least-cost option for a majority of the population in
Somalia, Following the medium demand growth, mini-grids are the least-cost solution for 57% of the
10
=== PAGE 9 ===
population and stand-alone PV technologies for 43% of the population to achieve universal access to
electricity in Somalia by 2030, Stand-alone PV technologies are the least-cost technology for 9.2 million
people, which would require approximately 130,000 new households to receive electricity from
stand-alone PV each year until 2030. By 2030, 9.6 million people live in locations where there is already
an existing mini-grid, where new investments are required both to connect the currently unelectrified
population within those locations as well as the population increase over the next ten years, and also
to provide generation to support increased consumption from existing customers
An additional 2.4 million potential mini-grid customers are found in settlements where the collected
data indicates there is no mini-grid today. Around one third of those are found in the ten largest
unelectrified locations each in Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubalond, Puntland, Somaliland and South West
where there is no mini-grid identified today, while the remaining two-thirds are spread amongst 510
locations. Deploying 570 mini-grids in the next 10 years would lead to a large increase in the total
number of mini-grids from today's level. However, it should be noted that many of the identified
settlements are located close to one another and could be supplied as a single mini-grid serving
multiple locations instead of separate mini-grids for each location. This is especially seen along the
Jubba and Shebelle rivers where population densities ore high, The list of the 60 identified locations is
found in Appendix H, These locations have a combination of large unelectrified populations and a
relatively high estimated demand, and could serve as a starting point for identification of priority
locations for new mini-grids,
OF THE POPULATION
to achieve universal access to
electricity in Somalia by 2030
130,000 NEW HOUSEHOLDS
to receive electricity from stand-alone
PV each year until 2030
2.4 MILLION POTENTIAL
mini-grid customers
Figure 5. Three separate locations where mini-grids ore identified as the least-cost solution, which
could be connected by a 2 MV line to form one mini-grid.
Providing universal access to electricity in Somalia in this scenario requires 910 MW of new generation
capacity (150 MW for stand-alone PV and 770 MW for existing and new mini-grids) and investments of
1,800 million USD, The geospatial distribution of least-cost electrification technologies is seen in Figure
7. The population connected by 2030 and investment per technology is presented in Table 5
aggregated for the whole country. Further breakdown per region for this scenario is reported in
Appendix G.
Table 5, Key results for the business as usual scenario
Technology
Mini-grids
Stand-alone PV
Total
Investment cost
(million USD)
1,410
390
1,800
Population connected
(million people)
12.0
21.2
Average household connection cost
(USD/household)
650
220
410
For priority service delivery facilities (health facilities, schools and water points), the majority of the
schools ond health facilities ore found to be connected to o mini-grid by 2030 in this scenario (Figure
6), while the majority of water points are located where stand-alone PV is the least-cost technology,
An estimated investment of 1.0 million USD is required to bring electricity to schools in locations where
there is no mini-grid today (split between 50% for mini-grids ond 50% for stand-alone PV), ond 62
million USD for health facilities (30% for mini-grids ond 70% for standalone PV),
Least-cost technology for priority service
100% •
60% •
200/0
Schools
Mini Grid
Stand-alone PV
Health facilities
Waterpoint
Figure 6. Least-cost technology for schools, health facilities and water points.
12
=== PAGE 10 ===
o
75 150 km
Technology split
Existing mini-grid in 2020
New mini-grids added after 2020
Stand-alone PV
Figure 7. Technology split in the "Business-As-UsuQl"-scenorio, Green settlements represent
settlements electrified by mini-grids in 2020, red settlement ore settlements that ore electrified by
new mini-grids built after 2020 ond the rest ore electrified by stand-alone PV
4.1.1 The case for expansion of existing mini-grids to form small regional
networks
A further analysis was conducted to examine the potential for expansion of existing MV networks to
provide an alternative means of gaining electricity access in locations near the existing MV networl<s,
An example of what this can look like is displayed in Figure 8, By 2030, 8.0 million people are estimated
to live in locations where there is already an existing MV network, Another 200,000 people are located
within 5 km from these locations and can be connected ot on additional cost of approximately 130
USD/household compared to the previous scenario where these location hove their own electricity
supply,
13
BelédW,e-yhe .
Figure 8. Electrification technology around Beledweyne, Areas to be connected to the existing MV
network in Beledweyne in blue, areas where separately operated mini-grids are found to be the
least-cost technology in red and areas where stand-alone PV technologies are found to be the
least-cost technology in yellow.
4.2 The potential of a national centralized grid electricity network
An analysis was also conducted to examine the potential for a future national transmission backbone
in Somalia. Such a network would connect the largest load centers in Somalia, and potentially also
other load centers along its route following the moin roads in Somalia, Two options are considered; one
notional network, and one split between Q northern and o southern port, based on potential designs
from the Power Master Plan (Figure 9), Table 6 shows the share of population projected to live within
5 and 10 km of the two different backbones in 2030, which are the most likely to be the first potential
beneficiaries of this network in case it is built,
14
=== PAGE 11 ===
The highest investments in this scenario are still found for mini-grids. A large reason for this is the
number of people that should be supplied by mini-grids before the national grid networl< could be
available, Finally, it is assumed in this study that existing mini-grids will be able to integrate with Q
notional transmission backbone, keeping both generation and distribution assets operating, or else
investment costs would be significantly higher,
Table 7, Population (2030) and cost split between technology categories for the main scenario with
separate north ond south transmission backbones
Technology
Grid
• North
• South
Mini-grids
Stand-alone PV
Total
Investment cost
(million USD)
930
530
400
1,250
380
2,560
Population connected
(million people)
6.7
28
5.2
9.1
21.2
Average household connection cost
(USD/household)
600
770
510
670
220
410
Figure 9. Potential transmission backbones, Split transmission backbone (left) and notional
transmission backbone (right), Based on designs from the Power Master Plan,
Table 6. Population projected to live within 5 and 10 km of the different potential backbones reported
in the Power Master Plan in 2030,
* Household connection costs do not include the cost of the HV transmission backbone
An estimated investment of 1.0 million USD is required to bring electricity to schools in locations where
there is no mini-grid today (split between 1% for grid[ Most of health and education facilities in the
major load centers connected to the grid, where there are already mini-grids, are assume to be
electrified already. Therefore the low investment cost for health and education facilities allocated to
the grid in this scenario,], 50% for mini-grids, 49% for stand-alone PV), and 6.3 million USD for health
facilities (3% for grid, 29% for mini-grids, 68% for standalone PV),
Least-cost technology for priority service
Transmission backbone
Split
• North
• South
National
Population within 5 km
12%
22%
420/0
Population within 10 km
370/0
24%
470/0
100%
Schools
Mini Grid
aua
In the case of separate north and south networks, the network is the least-cost electrification option
for 32% of the population in Somalia, Another 25% would be served by mini-grids, and 43% by
stand-alone PV technologies, The geospatial distribution of least-cost electrification technologies is
seen in Figure 11, The breal<down per priority service delivery facilities is seen in Figure 10. Investments
in these networl<s would cost 930 million USD, assuming they are available after 2025, split between
760 million USD for the transmission backbone and substations and 170 million USD for generation
capacity added after 2025 (Table 7),
15
delivery facilities
Health facilities
Stand-alone PV
El Grid
Waterpoint
Figure 10, Least-cost technology for schools, health facilities ond water points,
a Most of health ond education facilities in the major lood centers connected to the grid. where there ore olreody mini-grids. ore assume to
be electrified already. Therefore the low investment cost for health and education facilities allocated to the grid in this scenarioa
16
=== PAGE 12 ===
Table 8, Population (2030) and cost split between technology categories for the main scenario with an
integrated transmission bacl<bone
Technology
Grid
Mini-grids
Stand-alone PV
Total
Investment cost
(million USD)
1,490
1,210
3,080
Population connected Average household connection cost
(million people)
4.0
9.1
21.2
(USD/household)
600
670
220
410
* Household connection costs do not include the cost of the I-IV transmission backbone
An estimated investment of million USD is required to bring electricity to schools in locations where
there is no mini-grid today (split between 4% for grid, 47% for mini-grids, 42% for stand-alone PV), and
million USD for health facilities (7% for grid, 25% for mini-grids, 68% for standalone PV),
Least-cost technology for priority service
100% •
o
75 150 km
Least-cost technology split
Grid
Mini-grid
Stand-alone PV
— National HV-line backbone
800/0 •
200/0 •
Schools
Mini Grid
Figure 11. Least-cost technology options by 2030 in a scenario with Q split transmission backbone.
A national grid network that is connected from north to south is the least-cost option for million
people, an additional 1.3 million people compared to the split networl<, The additional population can be
found in the central parts of Somalia that cannot be reached by the split backbone option. This reduces
the population connected by mini-grids to 4.5 million by 2030 (Table 8). The geospatial distribution of
least-cost electrification technologies is seen in Figure 13, The shore of priority service delivery facilities
connected to the grid also increase, as displayed in Figure 12
17
Health facilities
Stand-alone PV
Waterpoint
Grid
Figure 12, Least-cost technology for schools, health facilities and water points,
=== PAGE 13 ===
Table 9. Sensitivity analysis on investment cost depending on demand and electrification pathway.
Mini-grids ond stand-alone
only (Million IJSD)
Split transmission backbone
(Million
Integrated transmission
backbone (Million IJSD)
Low demand
1,530
2,260
2,790
Medium demand
1,740
2,470
3,000
High demand
8,260
4,000
4,540
The role of stand-alone PV technologies is mostly affected by the demand level and distribution
technology cost, Higher demands favor the transition from stand-alone PV to mini-grids, and low-cost
distribution technologies can also allow for more mini-grids instead of PV technologies (Table 10),
However, it is evident thot stand-alone PV technologies will hove an important role to ploy to increase
electricity access rates in Somalia, both for the nomadic population as well as large parts of the rural
population,
Table 10, Sensitivity analysis on the population supplied by stand-alone PV as least-cost technology
o
75 150 km
Least-cost technology split
Grid
Mini—grid
Stand-alone PV
National HV-line backbone
depending on demand,
Population served by
stand-alone PV in 2080
(million people)
Low demand
Medium demand
8.7
High demand
7.5
Figure 13, Least-cost technology options by 2030 in o scenario with a split transmission backbone,
4.3 Sensitivity analysis
This section presents the l<ey findings from the sensitivity analysis with regards to investment cost and
the role of stand-alone PV systems, There are two drivers that affect the investment cost more than
the others: the level of electricity demand and the inclusion of a national transmission backbone, Table
9 below presents the average investment cost for the combinations of demand levels and transmission
backbone options, The average value is taken from 16 sensitivity scenarios for each combination of
demand and transmission backbone option, with regards to PV cost, diesel cost, intensification
strategy and distribution technology cost,
In case of a slow demand growth, the additional cost of a national transmission backbone is very high
in comparison to the business as usual case. However, as demand grows the additional investment
cost required for a national transmission backbone is relatively lower, indicating that the investment
cost required to build the national transmission backbone could be more economically justifiable in
case of a further demand growth beyond 2030 or by the addition of larger industrial loads. In such
cases a grid can reduce the generation costs due to economies of scale compared to the mini-grids,
19
5 Concluding remarks
In oll of the scenarios, on integrated approach using different technology types is required to increase
access to electricity ot the least-cost in Somalia, Stand-alone PV technologies are required in areas
with smaller populations or lower demand for electricity, while mini-grids and a potential national grid
networl< can supply areas with higher loads at a lower cost. In either case, a large increase in the
number of mini-grids will be required, A selection of potential locations has been provided, The notional
geospatial analysis can help identify these locations according to different priorities and indicative
investment costs. However, it should be noted that these are based on high-level data, and a detailed
local assessment is always required in order to more closely examine the demand and exact
configuration of the generation and distribution system of each settlement,
20
=== PAGE 14 ===
Furthermore, it is evident that a HV transmission network in these scenarios increases investment
costs significantly to meet the studied demand. Both of the HV network options (separate and
national) have been assumed to be available only in the second half of the modelling period (after
2025). An HV network would likely require other loads not captured in this study, such as heavy
industries, in order to be economically justified from an investment perspective in the short term. It is
important to note however that the investment costs are only part of the total electricity costs, this
can be compensated in part or in full by lower generation costs from e.g. large scale hydropower or
other centralized generation. If an HV transmission backbone combined with low-cost centralized
electricity generation could stimulate the growth of industries with large electricity loads, the HV
bacl<bone could likely be better justified economically, but that is beyond the scope of this report,
Further demand growth in other sectors after 2030 could also hove an impact,
Note that grid-connected populations in the two scenarios with an HV transmission backbone also
include the population connected to existing mini-grids before 2030 (which will need to l<eep adding
capacity to increase connections until an HV transmission backbone could be in place), It hos been
assumed that existing generation and distribution assets will remain operational also when a potential
HV network arrives, to avoid duplicate distribution networks or generation capacity, which would
further increase costs. This means that a transmission backbone should be able to integrate with
existing ESPs from both a technical-, policy- and business perspective to minimize costs. It is important
that the efforts in the power sector are harmonized between the federal and state governments as
well as with the existing ESPs and their isolated networks in order to ensure efforts of all the
stakeholders are complementary,
Notably, when considering a distance of 5 or 10 km around existing or potential energy infrastructure,
a similar share of the population could be reached by extending the existing mini-grids or MV lines as
from the potential HV lines considered, A large focus is required on lowering generation costs in
existing mini-grids in this case, as well as implementing low-cost distribution costs to connect new
settlements from existing or planned infrastructure, It is assumed that all existing mini-grids in this
study are hybridized to include PV or wind-generation, to reduce reliance on expensive diesel
generation.
Finally, all scenarios are available to be visualized on the Somalia Electrification Platform together with
l<ey datasets including the location of priority service delivery facilities
Reference list
[2]
[3]
[5]
[6]
[71
[8]
[9]
[Ill
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
The Ministry of Planning,lnvestment ond Economic Development, 'SOMALIA NATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2020 to 2024', 2019, Accessed: Nov, 27, 2020, [Online], Available:
http://mop.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NDP-9-2020-2024.pdf,
IEA IRENA, UNSD, World Banl<, and WHO, 'Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report'. 2020,
[Online], Available:
https://trockingsdg7.esmop.org/dQto/files/down10Qd-documents/trocking_sdg_7_2020-
UNICON Ltd, 'Power Master Plan - Development of a Power Master Plan for Somalia Project',
Ministry of Energy ond Water Resources I World Bank, Oct, 2018,
'Somalia', Lighting Africa, https://www,lightingafrico.org/country/somaliQ-2/ (accessed Feb,
27, 2021).
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, 'National Energy Policy of the Federal Republic of
Somalia (Draft)] 2018, Accessed: Apr, 19, 2021, [Online], Available:
https://moewr.govso/wp-content/uploods/2019/03/DRAFT-0 F-ENERGY-POLlCY.pdf,
'Intermediate workshop summary', Feb. 11, 2021, .
S4ALL, 'Integrated Electrification Pathways for Universal Access to Electricity: A Primer', 2019.
https://wwwseforQll.org/system/files/2019-06/SEforALL_lEP_2019.pdf (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
D, Sahai, 'Toward Universal Electricity Access: Renewable Energy-Based Geospatial Least-Cost
Electrification Planning', 2013.
https://www.esmap.org/sites/defa ult/files/esm I es/A STAE_lnd on esi a_TlJ pdf (a ccessed
Feb, 27, 2021),
Directorate of National Statistics, Federal Government of Somalia, 'The Somali Health ond
Demographic Survey 2020', 2020,
https://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/defoult/files/pub-pdf/FINAL%20SHDS%20Report%202020_V7_0.pdf
(accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
OnSSET/Clustering, The Open Source Spatial Electrification Tool, 2021,
'CCCM DSA IDP Sites Jan 2019', 2019.
https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=bf438c1cef254f2a9a66b557a125908f (accessed Feb; 27,
2021),
P. J Burke ond Z, Csereklyei, Understanding the energy-GDP elasticity: A sectoral approach', Energy
Economics, vol. 58, pp. 199-210, Aug. 2016, doi:
Bhatia Mikul and Angelou Niki, 'Beyond Connections* Energy Access Redefined', TECHNICAL REPORT
008/15, 2015, Accessed: Feb. 14 2021, [Online], Available:
https://openknowledgeworldbonk.org/bitstreom/hondle/10986/24368/Beyond0connect0d000
M. Kummu, M. Taka, and J, H. A, Guillaume, 'Gridded global datasets for Gross Domestic Product and
Human Development Index over 1990-2015', Scientific Dato, volt 5, no, 1, Dec, 2018, doi:
The World Banl<, JSomali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment - Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali
High Frequency Survey', 2019.
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curoted/en/464241565765065128/pdf/Findings-from-
Wave-2-of-the-SomQli-High-Frequency-Survey,pdf (accessed Dec, 15, 2020),
22
=== PAGE 15 ===
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
23
A. Korl<ovelos, B. Khavari, A, Sohlberg, M. Howells, and C. Arderne, 'The Role of Open Access Dato in
Geospatial Electrification Planning and the Achievement of SDG7. An OnSSET-Bosed Case Study for
Malawi', Energies, vol. 12, no, 7, p. 1395, Apr. 2019, doi: 10,3390/en12071395,
'Ministry of Education in Puntland - Putting Education First'. http://www.moepuntland.com/ (accessed
Feb. 27, 2021).
'OpenStreetMap Nominatim', https://nominotim.openstreetmop.org/ui/search.html (accessed Feb. 27,
2021).
'Somalia schools Humanitarian Data Exchange', https://doto.humdota.org/dataset/somolia-schools
(accessed Feb. 27, 2021).
The World Bonk, 'ROGEP', 2017,
https://www.lightingofrica.org/wp-content/uploods/2017/12/ROGEP-overview_-Dec-17.pdf (accessed
Dec, 15, 2020).
IJN, 'World Population Prospects - Population Division - United Notions', 2019.
https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Stondard/PopulQtion/ (accessed Dec. 15, 2020).
US AID, 'Powering Health: Electrification Options for Rural Health Centers', p. 36, 2018,
WHO, 'Modern Energy Services for Health Facilities in Resource-Constroined Settings', 2015,
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstreom/handle/10665/156847/9789241507646_eng.pdf?sequence
=1&isAllowed=y (accessed Dec. 15, 2020),
'FAOSTAT', http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#dota/QC (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'MopSPAM I Home of the Spatial Production Allocation Model!' https://www.mopspam.info/ (accessed
Feb. 27, 2021).
'Global Food Security-Support Analysis Dato ot 30 m (GFSAD)',
https://www.usgs.gov/centers/wgsc/science/global-food-security-support-analysis-data-n-m-
gfsad?qt-science_center_objects=()# (accessed Feb, 27, 2021).
R. G. Allen and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Eds„ Crop evapotranspiration:
guidelines for computing crop water requirements. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Notions, 1998,
SAVVA Andreas P, and Karen FRENKEN, 'Irrigation Manual Module 4', in Crop Water Requirements and
Irrigation Scheduling, ,
D, Mentis et 'Lighting the World: the first application of an open source, spatial electrification tool
(OnSSET) on Sub-Saharan Africa', Environmental Research Letters, vol. 12, no, 8, p. 085003, Aug. 2017,
doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/aa7b29.
'IJN Modelling Tools'. https://un-modelling.github.io/modelling-tools/#geo-electricity (accessed Feb. 27,
2021).
'Global Electrification Platform Explorer', Global Electrification Platform Explorer,
https://electrifynow.energydota.info (accessed Feb, 14, 2021).
A. Korkovelos et Ql., 'A Geospatial Assessment of Small-Scale Hydropower Potential in Sub-Saharan
'Global Solar Atlas', https://globalsolaratlas.info/map (accessed Feb. 27, 2021).
'GADM', https://gadm.org/download_country_va.html (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'SRTM Dato - CGIAR-CSI SRTM'. https://srtm.csi.cgior.org/srtmdata/ (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'LP DAAC - MCD12Q2', https://lpdaoc.usgs.gov/products/mcd12q2v006/ (accessed Feb. 27, 2021).
'VIIRS Nighttime Lights', https://eogdota.mines.edu/products/vnl/ (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'Global Wind Atlas', Global Wind Atlas. https://globalwindatlas.info (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
[39]
[401
[41]
[421
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[481
[49]
[50]
[51]
'Explorer - Maloria Atlas Project', https://maloriaotlas.org/explorer/#/ (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'Dashboard SWIMS'. https://swims.faoswalim.org/dashboard/view (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
R, M. Johannsen, P. A, Østergaard, and R. Hanlin, 'Hybrid photovoltaic and wind mini-grids in Kenya:
Techno-economic assessment ond barriers to diffusion', Energy for Sustainable Development, vol. 54,
111-126, Feb, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.esd.2019.ll.002,
IRENA, 'Technologies Cost Analysis HYDROPOWER', 2012.
https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/lRENA/Agency/Publication/2012/RE_Technologies_
Cost_Anolysis-HYDROPOWER.pdf (accessed Dec, 16, 2020),
IRENA, 'Renewable power generation costs in 2019', p, 144 2019,
ESMAP, The World Bank, Mini Grids for Half a Billion People, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2019.
J, Agenbroad, K, Carlin, K. Ernst, and S, Doig, 'SIX WAYS TO REDUCE MINIGRID COSTS BY FOR
RURAL ELECTRIFICATION', p, 57, 2018,
EU Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI POF) ond Africo Electrification Initiative, 'Low
Cost Grid Electrification Technologies', 2015.
http://www.euei-pdf.org/sites/default/files/field_publication_file/150907_euei_low-cost-manual_
en_rz_07_web.pdf (accessed Dec, 16, 2020),
'Model for Electricity Technology Assessment (META) I ESMAP', https://www.esmop.org/node/3051
(accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
JSub-Saharan Africa: Introducing Low-cost Methods in Electricity Distribution Networks I ESMAP'.
https://www,esmop.org/node/946 (accessed Feb, 27, 2021),
'Sustainable Energy Handbook, Module 52: On-grid Rural Electrification I Copocity4dev',
https://europa.eu/capacity4dev/public-energy/documents/sustainable-energy-handbool<-module-52-
grid-rural-electrification (accessed Feb' 27, 2021).
S, Szobå, K, Bådis, T, Huld, and Mi Moner-Girona, 'Energy solutions in rural Africa: mapping
electrification costs of distributed solar and diesel generation versus grid extension', Environ, Res.
Lett, val, 6, no, 3, p, 034002, Jul. 2011, doi: 10,1088/1748-9326/6/3/034002,
Annual Energy Outlook 2021'. https://www.eia.gov/outlool<s/aeo/ (accessed Feb. 27, 2021).
24
=== PAGE 16 ===
APPENDIX A
Appendix A - Geospatial mapping of buildings and population
The population datasets creates the base for the least-cost electrification analysis, For a geospatial
electrification model it is important to know the location of population settlements as well as the
settlement's size and shape, The population dataset is generated by aggregating raster cells into
polygon settlements using Q clustering algorithm developed by the KTH-teom, In this appendix, o
description of the raw data used, the clustering algorithm and post-processing of the resulting
population dataset follows.
Raw data
The main dataset used for the clustering process is a population raster provided through WorldPop, The
WorldPop data is generated in two steps:
First, all the buildings in the country are identified. This is done using high-resolution
satellite imagery. The areas with buildings represent areas where people live. The more
buildings identified in o patch, the more people we expect to live in the patch. Maxar
Technologies capture the satellite imagery at 0.5m resolution. Using the satellite imagery,
Ecopia.Al generate building footprints using artificial intelligence-assisted techniques. The
high resolution of the satellite imagery ensures correct identification of most buildings.
See Toble 11 for number of identified buildings per region.
WorldPop
The number of buildings identified in the first step is fixed, while the second step
(populating the buildings) is based on user-inputs, The user has to select the overage
household size per urban ond rural households os well os the number of overage housing
units per building and the ratio of residential buildings per cell, For both urban ond rural
pixels, 0,B3 is selected os the ratio of residential buildings per pixel, This means that in each
pixel we assume that 83% of the identified buildings ore residential, while the rest are other
structures (e.g. health and educational facilities, offices, stores etc.), For rural settlements
we assume one housing unit per residential building while we for urban assume 1.1 housing
units per residential building, The last parameter chosen by the user is the household size
in rural and urban areas, The household size is talcen from The Somali Health and
Demographic Survey 2020 by IJNFPA The demographic survey states 66 people per
urban household and 57 people per rural household. These inputs generate a population
layer with a total population of 15iB million, which is in line with what is projected in the PMP
Clustering-process
For the clustering-process an algorithm developed by the KTH-team [10] was used. The algorithm reads
three geospatial datasets: the population raster from WorldPop, nighttime lights and the notional
boundaries of the country, Nighttime lights ore mops showing where there is light during nighttime (for
more information on the geospatial datasets please refer to Appendix E. Apart from the GIS datasets the
user also hos to enter the population of the target year (15,8 million). The algorithm aggregates adjacent
raster cells into polygon settlements, The resulting dataset enables delineation of population settlements
Region
AwdQl
Bal<ool
Banaadir
Bari
Bay
Golguduud
Gedo
Hiiraan
Jubbada Dhexe
JubbQda Hoose
Mudug
Nugaal
Sooxil
Sanaag
Shabeelloha Dhexe
Shabeellaha Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Woqooyi Galbeed
Total
Number of identified buildings
59,000
109,000
396,000
118,000
363,000
168,000
175,000
179,000
72,000
131,000
142,000
64,000
29,000
74,000
208,000
333,000
68,000
199,000
306,000
and highlights the area ond shape of different settlements,
Each resulting population settlement includes information regarding:
The maximum nighttime
Total population in the
light visible in each
settlement
settlement
Number of buildings in each
The total area of each
cluster
settlement
Table 11. Number of buildings identified per region
25
Total population living in
areas with visible nighttime
lights
26
=== PAGE 17 ===
Post-processing
After the population settlements are generated they are
classified as urban or rural based on population size and density.
This is an iterative process. Initial thresholds are given for
population density and size, Using this initial threshold the urban
ratio is calculated and compared to the actual urban ratio, If the
calculated urban ratio is larger than the real urban ratio, the
thresholds are increased and vice versa. For this analysis it is
assumed that 23% of the population live in rural areas and 51% in
urban areas (urban population also includes IDPs), The rest of the
population (26%) are nomads, This is consistent with the division
reported in The Somali Health and Demographic Survey 2020
Figure 14 below shows the urban-rural divide calibrated in the
APPENDIX B
Appendix B Residential electricity demand process
Residential electricity demand
For the residential electricity demand, the consortium collected information from the different ESPs to
map the current electricity consumption for currently electrified households, The electricity
consumption data was collected from ESPs in the five Federal Member States and Mogadishu from
September 2020 to January 2021,
The number of residential customers included in the survey was large (240,000), and formed the
baseline for the current demand estimation in 2020. The average current consumption per state
ranged between 190 kWh to 460 kWh per residential customer per year (Table 12), All ESPs reported
current overage residential consumption levels within Tier 2 or Tier 3 of the Multi-Tier Framework,
Table 12, Average consumption per state in ESP dota [2020).
analysis,
0 75 150 km
230/0
RURAL AREAS
URBAN AREAS
NOMADS
Region
Banaadir
Galmudug
Hirshabelle
Jubalond
Puntlan
SomalilancW
•outh West
Average current mini-grid consumption (kWh/household/year)
260
375
460
220
Settlements
Urban
Rural
For the urban electricity demand in 2030, three levels were projected: low, medium and high. The first
low and medium demand levels were based on demand growth projections based ESP consumption
data and GDP growth projections, The high demand level was based on demand targets from the
Power Moster Plon of 1325 kWh/household/yeor by 2030, Burke ond Csereklyer [12] found thot the
elasticity for electricity in Sub-Sohoron Africa for the residential demand was (166, Therefore, it was
assumed that the urban electricity demand in this study is elastic to GDP with a factor of 0.66 for the
low demand projection, leading to a 37% demand growth by 2030 compared to 2020. For the medium
projection, an elasticity of 1.0 was used os in the Power Master Plan, leading to Q 61% increase by 2030,
Figure 14. Urban-rural divide calibrated for
Somalia.
In addition, the number of IDPs living in each urban cluster is
also included. The IDPs included in the clusters are consistent
with the values reported by the Camp Coordination and Camp
Management (CCCM) and UNHCR dataset [11], They report 22
million IDPs, mostly situated in urban settlements
27
For the urban electricity demand in
2030, three levels were projected
LOW
MEDIUM
HIGH
28
=== PAGE 18 ===
The rural electricity demand was based on the Multi-Tier Framework (MTF) levels, In the low scenario, a
demand of 10-50 1<Wh/capita was assumed, which is in line with Tier 1 and Tier 2 of the MTF, In the medium
scenario, 10-100 1<Wh/capita was assumed, which includes also Tier 3 consumption at the higher end of the
range, Finally, in the high demand scenario, 10 kWh/capita to 150 1<Wh/capita per year was used
(corresponding to Tier 1 to Tier 3), in line with the rural demand levels considered in the Power Master Plon
[13]. The summary of the demand scenarios is seen in Table 13,
Table 13. Residential electricity demand scenarios
Scenarios
Low
Medium
High
Urban
ESP based demand, 0.66 elasticity and 4.9%
GDP growth rate
ESP based demand, 1 elasticity and 4.9% GDP
growth rote
Power Master Plan,
0.66 elasticity, 4.9% GDP
growth rote
Rural
10-50 kWh/capita yearly
10-100 kWh/capita yearly
10-150 kWh/copita yearly
Furthermore, rural settlements were classified based on GDP and poverty levels to estimate where higher
or lower demand were more likely, We refer to this as a Custom Residential Electricity Demand Indicative
Target (CREDIT) Layer. The layer is based on two datasets: GDP (PPP per capita) [14] and the poverty rate
[15] for each settlement. It is assumed that settlements which have a high GDP and low poverty rate can
reach the higher end of the demand range presented and vice versa (i.e. a rural settlement with high GDP
and low poverty rates can have a demand of 100 1<Wh/capita in the medium demand scenario) [16], For the
low scenario we have almost all of the rural population in Tier 2. For the medium and high we also see an
increasing Tier 3 distribution (see Figure 15),
75 150 km
Demand
Rural Mid demand
10 kWh/year and capita
23 kWh/year and capita
36 kWh/year and capita
48 kWh/year and capita
61 kWh/year and capita
74 kWh/year and capita
87 kWh/year and capita
100 kWh/year and capita
Figure 16. CREDIT-Iayer for Rural medium demand
As on example we con see in Figure 16 for
the rural settlements that the per capita
demand is high where we see green and
yellow, ond lower where it is redi
The urban demand was also differentiated
based on the state averages using Q
CREDIT layer [16], The urban settlements
with the lowest score (i.e. with low GDP
and high poverty rates) were assumed to
have o demand of 50% of the projected
demand for
the state,
and the
settlements with the highest score were
assumed to have a demand if 150% of the
projected urban demand for the state, This
variation was based on the variation seen
among the currently reported levels from
the ESPs, In the low demand scenario,
urban settlements was assigned 130-940
kWh/household/year based on the CREDIT
layer and projected average state
demand. In the medium and high demand
scenario, this was increased to 160-1110
and
660-2000 kWh/household/year
respectively.
100%
70%
60%
50%
0%
Low
Tier 1
Medium
Tier 2
High
Tier 3
Figure 15. Rural demand split accounting for CREDIT layer
29
The low demand projections therefore in the urban oreos ronge between 30 kWh/copitQ per year, in the
oreos where the poverty rate is the highest in combination with low GDP, to 231 kWh/capitQ where GDP is
high and poverty rate is low, The medium demand ranged between 36 kWh/capita per year to 272
kWh/capita per year. The high demand ranged between 175 kWh/capita per year to 351 kWh/capita per
year, This lead to Q majority of the urban settlements in the low ond medium scenario in Tier 2 ond Tier 3,
For the high demand scenario the majority of the urban population lead to o Tier 4 demand level (see Figure
17),
30
=== PAGE 19 ===
Urban demand split
100%
50%
300/0
20%
10%
Low
Tier 2
Medium
Tier 3
High
Tier 4
APPENDIX C
Appendix C - Productive and social electricity demand process
Demand for educational facilities
Locations of educational facilities were collected from the federal Ministry of Education, Culture and
Higher Education, the Puntland Ministry of Education website, UNICEF and the World Bonk [17], In total,
2,084 primary and 898 secondary schools were identified, Out of these, only 15% of the primary and 8%
of the secondary schools had their geographical locations in the form of coordinates reported. For the
rest of the schools coordinates were retrieved using Nominotim ond information regarding the states,
regions and districts of these schools [18], We estimate that 1702 and 665 of the secondary schools
were correctly geo-located (82 and 74% respectively), Correctly geo-located refers to educational
facilities that after processing in Nominatim fall within the correct sub-region (administrative level 2).
These schools were complemented with 182 schools collected by UNICEF ond the World Bank [19], These
schools however do not include the primary and secondary classifications, and are defined os
Ounclassifiedt'. The resulting school layer is available on the Spatial Data Infrastructure platform set up
by the consortium,
total, 2,084 primary and 898 secondary schools
Figure 17. Urban demand split accounting for CREDIT layer,
31
of the primary
Secondary
•geogrdphicol locutions
Each school is assigned an indicative electricity demand The electricity demand for primary ond
secondary schools is based on the typical appliances thot exist in each type of school, The demands
assumed in this study were 605 kWh/year for primary schools and 2,145 kWh/year for secondary
schools. These values are consistent with the values used in the Regional Off-Grid Electrification Project
country reports and have also been confirmed through discussions ond correspondence with the World
Bank [20],
For the unclassified schools an assumption was made regarding the ratio of primary to secondary
schools based on national estimates of the population in each age group by 2030, Primary school oge
in Somalia is 6-13 years, while secondary school oge is 14-17 years, According to UNDESAts population
estimates for 2030, the ratio between these age groups in Somalia will be to 1 in 2030 [21], This
ratio was used to weigh the electricity demand in the unclassified schools, resulting in 1,018 kWh/year.
The annual electricity demand for educational facilities in 2030 sums up to 2.6 GWh, assuming thot
schools do not consume electricity outside of the school year, Each school's demand is added to the
closest settlement. See Figure 18 for a map of all the schools used in the analysis and Table 14 for the
estimated yearly regional electricity demand in primary and secondary schools.
32
=== PAGE 20 ===
Demand for health facilities
In order to assess the electricity demand for health facilities, we used data from the Ministry of Health
ond the Somali Service Availability and Readiness Assessment 2016 (SARA), The health facilities are
classified os health-centers, hospitals, health posts, referral health centers and health facilities with
possible tuberculosis treatment (TB facilities), The healthcare facilities are classified into the USAID
categories [22] based on WHO's Access to Modern Energy Services for Health Facilities in
Resource-Constrained Settings - A Review of Status, Significance, Challenges and Measurement [23].
These values were complemented with values discussed with the World Bank, Table 15 below lists
associated daily electricity demand per category of health facilities determined after discussions with
the World Bank.
Table 15. Health facility categories ond associated electricity demand.
0 75 150km
Schools included in the analysis
• Primary
Unclassified
• Secondary
Figure 18, Map of educational facilities used in for the electrification analysis, Schools with
classification are collected from the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education and the
Puntland Ministry of Education website. Schools without classification were collected by the World
Bonk and UNICEF.
Table 14, Number of schools per category identified in each sub-region and the associated yearly
electricity demand, Note that no schools were identified in Jubbodo Dhexe.
Ground data categorization
Health posts
Health center
Referral health centers
TB facilities
Hospital (Small)
Hospitals (Large)
Categorization
Health post (Cotegory l)
Health center (Category II)
Hospital (Category Ill) in settlements with
less than 80,000 people
Hospital (Category Ill) in major urban
settlements with more than 80,000 people
Electricity demand (kWh/day)
4
40
1,200
1,920
Region
Awdal
Bol<ool
Banaodir
Bori
BOY
Golguduud
Gedo
Hiiraan
Jubbada Hoose
Mudug
Nugaal
Saaxil
Sanaag
Shabeelloha Dhexe
Shabeelloha Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Waqoyi Golbeed
Total
33
Yearly electricity
demand (MWh/year)
45
14
1,318
145
87
76
88
150
85
104
55
46
51
186
82
49
50
2,640
Secondary schools
477
19
19
14
18
46
665
Unclassified schools
44
55
28
46
182
In cases where a healthcare facility is overlapping one of the population settlements the electricity
demand is assigned to that cluster, Demand for healthcare facilities thot did not directly overlap ony
settlement is assigned to the closest settlement
A limitation of the method is that it is highly dependent on the quality of data inputs, Furthermore, the
some demand was assumed across the same categories of healthcare facilities, not taking into
account thot certain e.g. health centers consume more or less electricity thon others based on their
specialization, The total demand for health facilities in this analysis is 37 GWh per year, Half of this
demand is in the 20 largest settlements in the country. Table 16 lists the regional distribution of health
facilities and their yearly total electricity demands,
34
=== PAGE 21 ===
Table 17. Priority service delivery focilities served by mini-grids [2020]
Table 16. Number of health facilities per category identified in each region and the associated yearly
electricity demand. Note that no health facilities were identified in Jubbado Dhexe.
Region
Awdal
Bakool
anoodir
Bari
BOY
Golguduud
Gedo
Hiiroon
Jubbada Hoose
Mudug
Nugaal
Saaxil
Sanaag
Shabeellaha Dhexe
Shabeellaha Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Woqoyi Galbeed
Total
Yearly electricity
demand (MWh/year)
1,132
1,022
3,767
1,738
2,248
3,326
2,446
1,022
1,607
3,023
1,441
1,758
2,559
1,564
2,311
804
1,318
3,739
37,005
Number of health
centers
27
10
36
34
28
17
16
22
14
48
19
28
17
38
23
27
37
447
Number of health
posts
25
71
15
31
17
14
23
21
33
31
294
Number of
hospitals
58
Mini-grid access of public facilities
In total 799 health facilities (58 hospitals, 294 health posts and 447 health centers) and 2,549 education
facilities (1,702 primary, 665 secondary and 182 unclassified schools) are identified. In addition to this 4,840
water points were identified (the water points ore however not included in the electrification analysis,
instead they are visualized on the platform), Table 17 lists the total number of facilities in each region as
well as the number and percentage of facilities located in settlements that currently have access to
mini-grids, In total 995 (21%), 348 (44%) and 1,329 (52%) of all water points, health and educational facilities
respectively ore located in a settlement that currently hos access to a mini-grid,
t r.—u.
Faciltytype
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
LHeolth facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
LEducotionfociIities——
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Lwater point
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
CHealth facilities
Hospitals
Healthposts
Health centers
LEducotionfocilities
Primary
Secondary
unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
[Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berkod
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
[Health Ities
Hospitals
Healthposts
Health centers
FEducotIonfocilitles
pnmar
Secondary
unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Intersecting settlement with mini-grid. Absolute
values and percentages in parenthesis
Awdal
37 (11)
9 (111
4 [181
21 (11)
20 (38)
I [100)
12 (27)
12 (27)
Bakool
48 (16)
9 (43)
5 (10)
34 [151
2 (100)
a (40)
o [01
2 (100)
Banaadir
158 (99)
84 [100)
o [01
74 (971
5 [100)
2 (100)
35
689 (71
340
349173)
o [01
Bari
154 (35
76 (53)
n (42)
I (0.8)
(16
2 (100)
13 (38)
4139
63 [361
II (58)
Bay
78 (38)
o [01
38
35(39)
5 (56)
Total
349
1
22
195
53
53
1
25
27
44
44
294
21
50
223
2
10
18
16
2
160
84
76
5
2
36
96
48B
477
44
144
182
2
71
34
9
173
19
204
78
35
36
=== PAGE 22 ===
Heat ac It es
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
ucation facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dam
Dug well
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
E ucation facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dam
Dug well
Spring
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education facilities
primary
Secondary
Unclassifie
Hiiraan
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dam
Dug wel
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug wel
Spring
ealth facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Healthcenters
ducation facilities
primary
Secondary
Unclassifie
37
21 (68)
3 (100)
18 (64)
30 (29)
6 (55)
alguduu
51
40 (31)
11 (7)
15 (47)
7 (100)
8 (47)
21127)
16 (27)
5 (26)
Gedo
5 (100)
3 (27)
27 (22)
5 (100)
3 (20)
10 (63)
48 (45)
6 (55)
Hiiraan
7 (19)
16 (53)
1 (100)
22 (100)
122 (68)
100 (66)
22 (81)
Jubbada Dhexe
3
28
104
11
397
71
129
33
164
32
7
8
59
19
179
5
11
122
7
36
5
15
16
118
107
11
100
23
10
30
22
179
152
42
4
10
26
2
L
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education fociljties
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Oom
Dug well
Spring
(Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
FEducotion facilities
Primary
Secondary
unclassified
Nugaal
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
[Education facilities
Primary
Secondary
unclassified
I
Water points
Berkod
Boreho e
Oom
Dug well
Spring
LHeaIth acl Ities
Hospitals
Health oosts
HealthQenters
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
L.
Berkad
Boreho e
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Jubbada Hoose
15 (8B)
2 (1001
13 (931
74 (81)
14 [100)
Mudug
65 (161
57 (28)
26 (31)
3 (75]
2 (61
21 (44)
58 (46)
51 (47)
7 (39)
Nugaal
71 (26)
25 (42)
36 (23)
1008)
2 (1001
11(58)
a (32
23 [35)
Saaxil
32
7 [641
Sanaag
60 (13)
251251
1 (111
33 (121
2
2
1
2
1
14
05
91
14
397
24
204
15
153
1
4
31
4B
26
10B
18
73
59
158
56
8
2
19
66
7
186
56
78
52
2B
3
14
11
457
100
274
65
38
=== PAGE 23 ===
EHealthÄfdtiIitiéÄ
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
KEducotion facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berl<0d
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Health fdtilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Water points
Berl<0d
Borehole
Dam
Dug well
Spring
Health fdtilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
t
Education facilities—.-
primary
Secondary
Unclassifie
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dam
Dug wel
Spring
Healthfacilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
r Togdheer
Water points
Berl<0d
Borehole
Dom
Dug well
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
Education facilities
Primary
Secondary
Unclassifie
39
(29)
4 180)
11 (48)
2 (33)
S abeellahaDhexe
35 (38)
19 (53)
16 (30)
3 (100)
15 (88)
6 (61)
43 (59)
3 (100)
Shabeellaha Hoose
17 (26)
12 (34)
5 (21)
21 (47)
4 (100)
I (33)
16 (42)
16 (11)
9 (20)
Sool
15 (5)
1 (100)
13 (57)
2 (67)
33 (60)
ogdheer
73 (47)
2 (100)
17 (63)
19 (33
11 (41)
2 (100)
6 (21)
5
23
23
61
55
6
92
36
1
55
1
73
3
65
35
6
24
45
4
38
144
46
370
2
56
4
282
26
45
21
23
33
3
55
338
22
156
28
130
2
62
2
33
27
2
28
Water points
Berkad
Borehole
Dam
Dug well
Spring
Health facilities
Hospitals
Health posts
Health centers
ducotionfocilitres
Primary
Secondary
Unclassified
Woqooyl Galbeed
50 (10)
1 (13)
12 (9)
1019)
26 (12)
114)
5 [83]
29 (78)
23 (44
6 [100)
17 (37)
494
8
137
111
211
6
31
52
6
46
40
=== PAGE 24 ===
II
c)
b)
d)
Harvested Area (ha)
C] 1 - 1,000
9,000 -
Electricity demand for agricultural irrigation
Approximately 46 percent of the employed population in Somalia work in the agricultural sector. Out of this,
54 percent work in crop cultivation. Agriculture is also identified as the highest priority by 4 out of 5 Federal
Member States according to the Somalia National Development Plan. Agricultural production in Somalia
greatly suffers from post-harvest storage techniques, The most commonly used grain storage practices are
traditional underground storage pits lined with clay. Due to the under-equipped nature and limitations of
post-harvesting management techniques in Somalia, our focus in the agricultural sector is on demand for
agricultural irrigation. Irrigation is very important in the agricultural production process as it offers
opportunity to stabilize crop yield. The methodology to estimate the electricity required to pump ground
and surface water for crop irrigation is a modified version of the methodology developed in a case study of
Mozambique, by KTH and Vivid Economics for the World Bank in Selection No. 1258760 Agricultural demand
modelling for geospatial electrification planning in SSA. The data and methodology used is described below.
Data
The Ministry of Agriculture provided valuable input data for the analysis. For this study four crops were
modelled; sorghum, maize, dry beans and sesame. These crops cover approximately 90% of the total
harvested area in Somalia according to FAO [24] and MapSPAM [25].
Methodology
The MapSPAM data comes in 10 1<m2 resolution and is downscaled to 1 1<m2 using geospatial covariates. The
methodology is split into three separate parts: pre-processing, downscaling and demand assessment,
Pre-processing
The downscaling process is based on sub-regions while the MapSPAM data hos a spatial resolution of 10
km2. The first step is to aggregate the MopSPAM data to Somalia's regions (administrative level 2). The
preprocessing results maps with area harvested per administrativ unit (see Figure 19 below).
41
Figure 19. Harvested area reported by MapSPAM aggregated to administrative level 2 for the
four modelled crops; a) sorghum b) sesame c) maize d] dry beans
42
=== PAGE 25 ===
Downscaling
Following aggregation, a downscaling is done in order to infer a higher resolution of 1 km 2. In order to do
this a list of 15 geospatial covariates (predictors) are used:
03
Average precipitation
Drainage class
04
Average wind speed
12
Enhanced vegetation
index
05
Soil pH in water
05
Normalized difference
vegetation index
06
Depth to bedrock
06
Elevation
07
Bulk density
07
Crop land cover
08
Clay content
Average temperature
09
Texture class
02
Average solar
irradiation
Soil organic carbon
The predictor datasets were extracted to a 1 1<m2 base grid and used as an input in the Fine-Scale Land
Allocation Tool (FLAT). FLAT is an open source tool based on an econometric framework which utilizes
biophysical measurements, aggregating crop land statistics to develop pixel level cropland allocation
predictions. The output of the FLAT predicts the crop allocation at a higher (downscaled) resolution.
Apart from the 15 predictors listed above a land cover map depicting crop land at 30 m2 resolution from
the Global Food Security-Support Analysis Dota [26] is used in order to ensure that the downscaled
results from the FLAT overlap l<nown agricultural land. These steps result in a 1 km2 point layer
representing the hectares of agricultural land across the study area.
Demand assessment
In each of the points generated from the downscaling process the water requirements and resulting
electricity demand for irrigation purposes are determined, This is mainly adopted from FAO Irrigation
and Drainage paper 56 [27] and FAO Irrigation Manual, Volumel, Module 4 [28], The steps can be broken
down into four phases:
3.
4.
The effective rainfall is calculated based on the monthly precipitation dotat The difference
between the effective rainfall and monthly crop water requirements gives an estimate of the
monthly irrigation needs, The crop water requirements are dependent on the crop calendar
and the crop coefficients.
Finally, the irrigation needs ore determined, Based on the irrigation requirements, the
electricity demand used to pump water at each location is calculated. The electricity demand
depends on various factors such as the pump efficiency, the friction factor for the pump, the
water depth and volumetric demand for water, This process outputs the electricity demand for
agricultural irrigation in each 1 km2 of agricultural land,
1.
2.
During the first phase we model the evapotranspiration of the specific crop,
The crop calendar and the corresponding planting, growing and harvesting periods for the four
crops modelled is obtained from FAQ, The crop calendars are divided into four regions, but for
all the modelled crops, the dotes for each growth stage are the same in the entire country and
only dependent on season (deyr or gu) (see Figure 20)
Assumptions
Some important assumptions are mode in the above steps:
Initial stage
Developement stage
Mid-season stage
Late season stage
1.
2,
3.
4,
Dry bean
Maize
Sesame
Sorghum
Dry bean
Maize
Sorghum
start
1/10
1/10
1/10
10/10
15/4
20/4
20/4
20/10
20/10
31/10
31/10
30/4
10/5
10/5
start
21/10
21/10
1/11
1/11
1/5
11/5
11/5
end
Deyr
29/12
29/12
19/11
9/11
30/6
19/6
19/7
start
30/12
30/12
20/12
10/1
1/7
20/6
20/7
end
20/1
20/1
31/1
15/2
15/7
10/7
10/9
start
21/1
21/1
1/2
16/2
16/7
11/7
11/9
end
21/2
21/2
28/2
26/3
16/8
11/8
11/10
Figure 20. Crop calendars per season for the modelled crops.
43
Only currently rainfed areas were considered
Harvesting of maize, dry beans and sorghum is made in both deyr (Sep/0ct-Dec) and gu (April -
June). No information was available for how much was harvested of each crop in each season and
therefore it was assumed thot the three aforementioned crops were harvested half in deyr and half
in gu, The evapotranspiration is lower in gu and therefore the water and electricity demand is larger
in this season on average, therefore this division has an effect on the demand.
It is assumed thot the same irrigation method is used across Somalia.
Crop coefficients are important for the analysis as it defines how well the uptake of water is for
different crops in different regions, These coefficients differ based on location, crop and growth
stage. The same crop coefficients are used per crop as listed by FAO (distinguishing them based on
crop type and growth stage, but not location),
44
=== PAGE 26 ===
Results
The modelled electricity demand for agricultural irrigation totals 47.3 GWh yearly, see Table 18 for a
breakdown of demand per crop and season. Figure 21 shows the spatial distribution of the downscaled
agricultural land in need of electricity for irrigation purposes. The maps show electricity demand in
southern and central Somalia mainly, while Puntland and Somaliland hove less demand due to smaller
shares of harvested areas, One of the assumptions made was that an equal portion of the harvest is
happening per season. Even in this case the electricity need for deyr is far higher than for gu due to
evapotranspiration being on average 20% lower (refer to Table 19 below). The split between seasons is
therefore important, The productive electricity was added to the total demand of the intersecting (or
closest) cluster, Table 19 shows the yearly electricity demand per region,
Table 18.Aggregated notional annual electricity demand for irrigation per crop and season
-3
Table 19, Yearly electricity demand for agricultural irrigation by sub-region.
Crop
Beans, dry
Maize
Sesame
Sorghum
Total
la)
3a)
Electricity demand during gu (GWh/year)
0.6
0.3
9.0
9.9
Region
Awdal
Bakool
Banaadir
Bori
Boy
Golguduud
Gedo
Hiiraon
Jubbodo Dhexe
Jubbada Hoose
Mudug
Nugaal
Saaxil
Sanaag
Shabeellaha Dhexe
Shobeellaha Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Woqoyi Golbeed
Total
Commercial demand
Harvested area Cha)
13,900
6233
622
87,309
5,125
21,169
34,516
25,755
52,384
3,553
5,421
3,930
60,922
77,968
1,893
8,141
408,841
Electricity demand for agricultural
irrigation (MWh/year)
365
1,450
150
11,890
1,370
1710
4,310
530
1,410
1210
15,410
5,380
740
1,400
47,325
2b)
1
1b)
3b)
rr¯y•
Electricity demand during deyr
(GWh/year)
9.8
11.1
37.4
4b)
The commercial demand for the modelling runs were added as a ratio to the urban residential demand,
From the survey from the ESP the commercial demand amounted to 25% of the residential demand,
Therefore, to account for the commercial demand in the urban oreos, the growth of the commercial
demand was assumed proportional to the residential demand in all urban areas. No commercial demand
was included for rural settlements.
ESP the
commercial demand
o
o
residential demand
Figure 21. Downscaled regions with irrigation demand for the four different crops during both seasons
1) sorghum 2) sesame 3) maize 4) dry beans, a) gu and b) deyr,
45
growth
of the commercial demand
46
=== PAGE 27 ===
APPENDIX D
Appendix D - Geospatial electrification model
What is OnSSET
KTH-dES, in collaboration with partners, has developed the GIS-based Open Source Spatial
Electrification Tool (OnSSET) to help identify least-cost electrification options. OnSSET has been used
for electrification analyses in many developing countries and outputs have been featured in high
impact peer reviewed journals and cutting-edge publications (e.g. [16], [29]), Furthermore, OnSSET has
been used for electrification analysis and capacity building activities by UNDESA, UNDP, World Bonk and
others, It was featured as the main tool in United Nations Modelling Tools for Sustainable Development
[30] for estimating the investments needed to achieve universal electricity access. Lil<ewise, OnSSET
has been used to develop a web-based open source application for high-level investment scenarios in
collaboration with the World Bank, ESMAP and other partners (the Global Electrification Platform[31]).
OnSSET identifies the least-cost technology mix in order to accomplish universal electrification. The tool
can also give intermediate investment scenarios and for this study the intermediate year of 2025 has
been chosen. The cost that is optimized is the cost to the consumer, therefore the scenarios ensure
that the lowest possible LCoE, given the different scenario parameters, is achieved in each settlement.
The modelled technologies can be customized from study to study. For the Indicative Least Cost
Geospatial Electrification Plan To Achieve Universal Access In Somalia the following five
technology-configurations are available:
Grid connection/extension (only available when there is a transmission backbone)
Mini-grids (PV/diesel, Wind/diesel, Hydro)
Stand-alone technologies (Solar PV)
There are different techno-economic costs (investments, operating & maintenance costs and fuel costs,
storage where applicable) associated with each of the different electrification options listed above.
Different costs apply depending on how the non-grid options are operated; as stand-alone systems or
aggregated in the form of mini-grids (important for reliability and bacleup logistics), These generating
costs are compared with the cost of grid extension, subsequent strengthening and connection. These
ore a function of e.g. distances from existing infrastructure, resource availability and the electricity
demand in each settlement.
The levelized costs of electricity (LCoE) is calculated for each electrification option in every settlement,
Depending on the geospatial characteristics (demand, resource availability, distance from the nearest
grid, accessibility to roods, etc.), OnSSET determines the least-cost supply option per settlement (for
definition of settlement see Appendix A). The results can be presented in various formats (interactive
maps, graphs, images, tables etc.),
47
SOLAR RESOURCE
GLOBAL HORIZONTAL IRRADIATION
WORLDBANKOROUP
ESMAP
SOMAUA
Kisrnayo
Bertie ia
.Hargeisa
Mogadishu
Renewable energy resources
Three renewable energy resources were
included in the model: solar, wind and
hydro. The solar resource can be utilized in
hybrid PV/diesel mini-grids
for
or
stand-alone PV modules, while wind and
hydro are considered only for mini-grids, For
PV-panels, the solar resource that is most
important
the Global Horizontal
is
Irradiation (GHI). The GHI potential is good
across all of Somalia, but somewhat higher
in the northern parts (Figure 22). Somalia
also has good wind resources, Wind power
potential is generally found to be higher
closer to the coasts, and in the eastern
parts of the country (Figure 23), Finally,
potential locations for run-of-river mini-grid
generation ore considered along the main
Jubba and Shabelle rivers, based on a
model developed by KTH-dES [321 (see
Igure 24).
c.f GHt.
Daily
6.6
Figure 22, Solar Global Horizontal Irradiation, Source:
GlobalSolorAtlas.info [33]
48
=== PAGE 28 ===
GLOBAL WIND ATLAS
MEAN WIND SPEED MAP
SOMALIA
ESMAP
Figure 23. Mean annual wind speed at 50 m altitude (m/s). Source:
GlobalWindAtlas.info [34]
Figure 24, Potential run-of-river hydropower
mini-grid sites, Source: KTH analysis
APPENDIX E
Appendix E - Data collection
A number of public and private partners has supported the data collection. In total, four federal state
ministries (the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher
Education, Ministry of Health ond Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation), the five Federal Member States
ond 32 ESPs hove provided their support in collecting and/or providing data for the project so far, In
total, the 32 ESPs have provided data for 38 locations, as some of them are operating in more than
one location.
The ESPs that hove supplied dato are; Adoado Electric Company, Al-Towba Electric Company, Amol
Technology, Badhan Electricity Company, Baidoa Electric Company, BECO Powering Somalia, Bil<ash
Power Supply Company, Blue Sky, Dayah Electric Company, Dayax Power Supply, El Wal( Electric
Compony, ENEE, Galmudug Electric Compony, Goboad Energy, Hodeed Electric Compony, Holgon Power
Supply, Hilaoc Electric Compony, Ilyas, Jalalaqsi Power Supply, JESCO, KAAH Electric Company, Mohas
Electric Company, Mogadishu Power Supply, NECSOM, NEPCO, Shabelle Energy Service, Somwater,
Somali Power and Lighting Company, Warsheikh Electric Company, Wehliye Power Supply, WESCO and
Yako Electric Company,
Their contributions are gratefully acknowledged, as this data significantly improves the quality and
usefulness of this analysis, and provides a strong base for future updates, Data is uploaded to the
Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) in accordance with the terms under which the different stakeholders
provided it. The SDI is further described in Appendix G of this report,
Geospatial datasets
OnSSET relies on the collection and preparation of GIS layers, The number of GIS layers needed for the
analysis is highly customizable and dependent on the scope of the analysis. Table 20 below presents
the main GIS datasets used in this analysis together with a brief description of the dataset along with
its functionality and source,
Table 20. GIS datasets used in the electrification analysis
Dataset
Population density
& distribution
Building footprints
Description
Spatial identification and
quantification of the current
(base year) population, This
dataset sets the basis of the
OnSSET analysis os it is directly
connected to the electricity
demand ond the assignment of
energy access goals.
Residential ond non-residential
building footprints captured
using satellite imagery.
Datasets used
Population clusters
developed by KTH
based on the
constrained WorldPop
data
WorldPop's Maxar
footprints
49
Year
Population clusters
developed 2021.
WorldPop dato
calibrated by the
KTH-teom, see
Appendix A.
Building footprints for
Somalia were based
on satellite imagery
from 2019 (18%), 201B
(39%), 2017 (21%), 2016
(9%), 2015 or earlier
(12%). See Appendix A
for more information
50
=== PAGE 29 ===
Dataset
Location of
Internally Displaced
Populations
Administrative
boundaries
Existing mini-grid
locations
Description
The location and number of
internally displaced people
Delineates the boundaries of
the analysis.
Used to identify and spatially
calibrate the currently
electrified/non-electrified
population, and act os o basis
for extension to new
settlements.
Potential future HV Represents the future plans for
network (63-330
W)
Existing MV
network (20 - 33
W)
Roods
Poverty
51
the extension of the notional
electric grid, It Olso includes
extension to current/future
substations, power plants,
mines ond queries.
Used to identify ond spatially
calibrate the currently
electrified/non-electrified
population, ond act os o basis
for extension to new
settlements.
Current rood infrastructure is
used to specify grid extension
suitability.
Poverty ratio per sub-notional
level, Used in order to derive
disaggregated electricity
demand in combination with
GDP layer.
Datasets used
cccM ond UNCHR [11]
GADM [341
A combination of data
collected from focal
points by Recon, the
PMP and the World
Bonk
Two different
backbones as reported
by the PMP.
Dota collected from
ESPs, PMP and state
focal points
OpenStreetMap
Dota derived from
Somali Poverty and
Vulnerability
Assessment: findings
from Wave 2 of the
Somali High
Frequency Survey [15]
by the World Bonk.
Poverty maps ore
reported per
sub-region for urban
ond rural/nomod
regions
Year
2019
2018
2017 (PMP), 2020
(World Bonk and
Recon)
2020 (continuously
updated).
Published in 2019,
survey dato from
December 2017.
Dataset
GDP
Elevation
Land cover
Night-time lights
GHI
Wind speed
Hydropower
potential
Travel time
Description
GDP per capita (PPP), used in
order to derive disaggregated
electricity demand in
combination with poverty layer.
The elevation mop is used in
order to determine the terrain
slope. Both the terroin slope
and the elevation are used in
order to specify the grid
extension suitability.
The land cover map classifies
the study oreo into 17 specific
regions. Different regions imply
different penalties on the grid
extension
Dataset used to identify and
spatially calibrate the currently
electrified/non-electrified
population,
Provide information about the
Global Horizontal Irradiation
(1<Wh/m2/year) over on area.
This is later used to identify the
availability/suitability of
Photovoltaic systems.
Provide information about the
wind velocity (m/sec) over an
oreo. This is later used to
identify the
availability/suitability of wind
power (using capacity factors).
Points showing potential
mini/small hydropower
potential. Dataset developed by
KTH- dES including
environmental, social ond
topological restrictions ond
provides power availability in
each identified point.
Visualizes spatially the travel
time required to reach from ony
individual cell to the closest
town with o population of ot
least 50,000 people.
Datasets used
DRYAD [14]
CGIAR-CSI SRTM (35)
MODIS land cover (36]
VIIRS [37)
Global Solar Atlas [331
Global Wind Atlas [38]
KTH
Malaria Atlas Project
Year
Published 2019, source
data from 2015.
2000
2019
2016 yearly composite
2019
published 2019, source
dato from 2008-2017
2016
Published 2018, source
dato from 2015.
52
=== PAGE 30 ===
Dataset
Location of schools
Locations of health
2016, 2020
care centers and
hospitals
Locations of water
points
Description
Locations of
primary/secondary/technical
training schools. This will be
important for the determination
of electricity consumption in the
educational sector
Locations of health care centers
and hospitals. This will be
important for the determination
of electricity consumption in the
health sector
Location water points in
Somalia
Datasets used
Ministry of Education,
Culture and Higher
Education, and the
Puntland Ministry of
Education website, the
World Bank and
UNICEF [17]
Somali Service
Availability and
Readiness
Assessment 2016,
Ministry of Health
2020
FAO SWALIM [40]
Year
2020-2021
2020
Mini-grid costs
Generation costs
Table 22 outlines the component costs used for calculating mini-grid generation costs for hybrid
PV/diesel mini-grids from ESMAP, Rocky Mountain Institute and as reported by ESPs, All of the ESPs
have reported to be using diesel generators, while only four ESPs have reported use of PV panels as
well (on a total of five locations), Not seen in the tables are wind turbine costs, which are estimated at
2,800 USD/kWp [411 and hydro-powered mini-grids, with on estimated generation investment cost of
USD/I<W [42] [43],
Table 22, Mini-grid component costs and technology life-times,
Parameter
Solor panel &
mounting
Diesel generator
PV inverter
Batteries
Battery inverter
Cost
USD/I(WP
IJSD/kWp
LISD/I(VA
USD/l<Wh
LISD/kWp
International
least-cost (ESMAP,
RMI) [44] [45]
534
261
80
139
142
Local costs
(ESPs)
1,500
150
45
Life-time (RMI)
[451
25
25
25
Techno-economic parameters
The LCoE for different technology configurations is highly dependent on the techno-economic
parameters attributed to them, Specifics for each existing technology configuration in OnSSET is given
in this section, The values below ore derived from Q mix of international sources, information from the
PMP and dato collected from ESPs.
Stand-alone PV costs
The costs for Stand-alone PV used in the analysis were collected from local suppliers, Stand-alone PV
costs are presented as IJSD/I<W of PV capacity, These costs, presented in Toble 21 below, represents
the system cost, including batteries,
Toble 21. Stand-alone PV cost parameters. Left column: peak power capacity of the solar panel,
right column: the investment cost per I<W.
Type of System
<2 Wp
QOO wp
>250 wp
53
Investment Cost (USD/kW)
11,000
9,200
2,200
2,625
2,750
2,700
Life-time
(ESPs)
25
IO
IO
54
=== PAGE 31 ===
Distribution costs
KTH hos collected distribution costs from a number of sources, including EUEI PDFs Low Cost Grid
Electrification Technologies [46] (2015) report, ESMAP's Model for Electricity Technology Assessment
[47] (2012), and Sub-Saharan Africa: Introducing Low-cost Methods in Electricity Distribution Networks
[48] (2006) report, In addition, KTH has reviewed these through several electrification analyses in the
past years, Low-cost technologies as reported by international sources and local costs reported by
ESPs are presented in Table 23 below.
Table 23. Distribution system costs and technology lifetimes,[16], [49]
Table 24. Potential HV transmission network costs.
Option
split HV
backbone
National HV
backbone
Diesel cost
Investment cost
(million USD) [31
760
1,280
Transmission cost
(USD/kWh)
0.05
0.075
Generation cost
(USD/kWh)
0.05
0.05
Combined transmission and
generation cost (USD/kWh)
0.10
0.125
Parameter
MV line cost -
11-33 kV
LV line cost -
0.240 kV
Service
transformer
Household
connection cost
Unit
IJSD/km
IJSD/km
USD/50 kVA
IJSD/
Household
International
least-cost
technologies
9,000
5,500
3,500
Local ESP costs
26,600
16,000
30
Life-time
(ESPs)
20
15
Two diesel fuel cost projections are used for the study (Table 25), Both are based on current diesel
costs as reported in the Power Master Plan, from which the low and high costs are projected from the
current cost based on two trajectories for crude oil prices. These costs are assumed to be reflective of
the moin urban centers, An additional fuel transportation cost is added for oll settlements with
populations below 50,000 people, following the approach of Szabo et oli [50],
Table 25. current and projected diesel fuel cost
Transmission backbone costs
Two potential transmission backbone options are considered in this study, Their costs and layouts are
based on the Power Master Plan. As reported in the PMP, the split transmission backbone hos a
required investment cost of 760 million USD (460 million USD for the northern section and 300 million
USD for the southern section) including HV lines and substations and the national transmission
network requires investments of 1,280 million USD. It is estimated in the PMP that the former hos a
transmission cost of 0.05 USD/l<Wh (0.06 USD/kWh in the north and 0.04 in the South) and that the
latter has a transmission cost of 0.075 IJSD/l<Wh. On top of this comes the cost of power generation
and distribution network. The distribution network follows the costs presented above. Potential
generation options outlined in the PMP are a hydropower plant at Bardhere and Q thermal power plant
at Berbera, or else imports from neighboring countries, IRENA estimates power generation costs from
new power plants in 2019 to be, on average, 0.047 IJSD/l<Wh for hydropower, 0.07 USD/l<Wh for
utility-scale solar PV and 0.05 IJSD/l<Wh for coal-power [43], In this study, generation costs from large
power plants are estimated at 0.05 USD/l<Wh, The generation and transmission costs used in this
study for Q potential HV transmission backbone are presented in Table 24 below, Note that these do
not include the cost of the distribution network, and potential MV connection line, which are calculated
separately,
Parameter
Diesel current
price
Diesel future low
price
Diesel future
high price
Value
0.6
0.6B
0.9
Unit
USD/liter
USD/liter
USD/liter
Source
Power Master Plan
ElA Annual Energy Outlook
2020 [51) (reference case)
ElA Annual Energy Outlook
2020 [51] (high projection
case)
!rgv
55
56
=== PAGE 32 ===
APPENDIX F
Appendix D - Geospatial electrification model
Electrification Scenarios
Three main types of scenarios have been developed with regard to different electrification strategies.
The first two are based on a case where only mini-grids and stand-alone PV technologies are available
until 2030. The second two are based on the development of a notional transmission backbone. It is
assumed that this HV backbone will be available only after 2025. The scenarios are developed to
explore a wide range of possible developments and their costs, Each one of the three moin scenarios
are subject to sensitivity analysis with regards to five l<ey drivers; demand growth, intensification
strategy, distribution costs, PV panel costs and diesel fuel costs. In the following sections we refer to
the above as six levers, where the first lever represents the main scenario and the five other levers
represent the five drivers,
Levers
The six (6) levers and their options are outlined in detail below, Each lever comes with two or three
options, for a total of 144 scenarios, Each of these scenarios can be visualized on the online platform,
Lever 1. Electrification strategy (main scenarios)
Business as Usual - Mini-grids and stand-alone only.
The first main scenario type includes mini-grid and stand-alone PV technologies only. The
technology that can meet the demand at the lowest cost in each location is identified as the
least-cost technology.
Separate north and south transmission backbone.
The second main scenario type includes mini-grid and stand-alone PV technologies, as well as
a split north and south transmission network as outlined in section of this report, Each
mini-grid supplies only a single settlement in these scenarios,
One national transmission backbone.
The third main scenario type includes mini-grid and stand-alone PV technologies, as well as a
notional transmission network as outlined in section 4.3 of this report. Each mini-grid supplies
only a single settlement in these scenarios.
Lever 2. Intensification strategy
No intensification.
By default, the OnSSET model chooses the least-cost electrification technology within each
settlement, This means in some cases a mini-grid or stand-alone technology can be chosen as
the least-cost technology, even in areas very close to the existing or planned network. This
option considers a purely least-cost approach where settlements connect to existing MV
networl<s or potential future HV networl<s only if it is the least-cost option,
5 km intensification.
This option includes a target of connecting all settlements within 5 km of the existing MV
networks or potential future HV networks, even if this is not the least-cost option, but only if
the connection cost per household is below a certain threshold, In the results presented here
the threshold is set to 1,800 USD/household, The distance target (5 1<m) and threshold (1,800
USD/household) are based on previous projects undertaken by the KTH-team,
57
Lever 3. Demand target
This lever examines different levels of residential electricity demand as well as commercial demand in
urban areas,
Low.
This follows the low demand outlined in Appendix B based on reported consumption levels
from ESPs and o lower electricity demand growth projection,
Medium.
This follows the medium demand outlined in Appendix B based on reported consumption levels
from ESPs and a higher electricity demand growth projection,
High.
This follows the higher electricity demand levels outlined in Appendix B,
Lever 4. Distribution costs
This lever examines the role of MV and LV line costs,
Existing local technologies.
This option is based on current MV and LV costs reported by ESPs in Somalia,
Low-cost distribution technologies.
This option is based on best proctices for electrification from selected international sources,
Lever 5. Mini-grid PV panel cost
This lever examines the role of PV panel costs for mini-grids,
Low.
The low cost option is based on international benchmarks/targets for 2020 as reported by
ESMAP in Appendix E,
High.
The high cost option is based on local costs reported by ESPs in Somalia, also seen in Appendix
E, which are relatively higher,
Lever 6. Diesel fuel cost
The low and high costs are projected from the current cost based on two trajectories for crude oil
prices, as described in Appendix E,
Low.
The low cost option follows the reference case of crude oil cost projections of the IES Annual
Energy Outlook 2020,
High.
The high cost option follows the high projection case of crude oil cost projections of the IES
Annual Energy Outlool< 2020.
58
=== PAGE 33 ===
Sensitivity Analysis
The boxplots in this section visualize the sensitivity analysis as it pertains to the investment costs for
the different levers, Below follows a description of how the boxplots should be interpreted and an
analysis of what they show.
A Box plot consists of the following parts:
Box - The box has three lines, One defining the top of the box, this represents the 75th
percentile, meaning that 25% of the values (scenarios in this case) can be expected to found
above the box and 75% of the observations below this line. One line in the middle representing
the median, meaning that half the range can be found on either side of this line. One line
defining the bottom of the box representing the 25th percentile, meaning that 25% of the
observations are lower than this and the rest are higher.
Bottom whisker - The bottom whisl<er can be found under each box, The bottom whisker starts
at the 25th percentile and ends at the minimum value,
Top whisker - The top whisker can be found above each box, The top whisl<er starts at the 75th
percentile and ends at the maximum value,
Comparison of electrification pathways
In the case of the Business as Usual scenario (only mini-grids and stand-alone PV), the total investment
cost ranges between 1.2 and 3.9 billion USD, with a median cost of all scenarios of 1.8 billion USD. When
taking into account an HV backbone the investment cost increases considerably, For a split HV network
the investment cost at least 2 billion USD and at most billion USD, while the same range for the
national backbone is between 2.5 and 5 billion IJSD. A large share of the investment cost in the
scenarios with HV backbone can be attributed to the investment cost of the backbones themselves as
the split bacl<bone would cost 760 million USD and the national alternative would cost 1,280 million
USD.
Investment cost (Million USD)
Lever sensitivity
The sensitivity of the investment cost for the five levers examined for each of the main scenarios can
be seen in in Figures 26-28 below, The box plot escribes the ronge of investment costs for oll scenarios
with Q specific lever setting for the respective electrification pathway, Two of the examined drivers are
seen to play the largest role for the investment cost in all of the scenarios: residential demand level
and distribution technology costs. Naturally, a higher demand leads to increased generation and
transmission and distribution requirements and associated costs, The High demand, taken from the
PMP, in urban areas is significantly higher thon the Medium demand, projected based on reported
consumption levels from ESPs. A possible explanation of this is that given the high current electricity
cost, current consumption levels are potentially suppressed, and demand is higher than supply in some
oreos, Furthermore, o combination of low-cost MV lines, (e.g. Single Wier Earth Return lines) con be less
than half the cost per kilometer of the reported MV lines cost of current technologies, Across all 144
scenarios, switching to low-cost distribution technologies lower investment costs by 13% on average,
The intensification lever is seen to have only o marginal effect on investments across all four main
scenarios, On average, the 5 km intensification option increases connections to settlements with in 5
km of existing MV lines or potential future HV lines by 330,000 people, This relatively low effect is due
to the fact that many settlements within 5 km from existing mini-grids or HV lines would already be
connected os the least-cost option, or else require investments of more than 1,800 USD/household and
therefore not be forced to connect if it is not the least-cost option,
The last two levers highlight the dynamic between PV and diesel generation in mini-grids, PV panels
have a higher investment cost but lower running costs (including fuel) compared to diesel generators.
Higher PV costs decrease investment costs slightly, as Q higher shore of diesel generators will be used
in the mini-grids for least-cost generation, Similarly, higher diesel fuel costs lead to higher investment
costs as a higher share of the demand will be met by PV generation in this case,
Mini-grids and stand alone PV only
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
Mini-grid ond stand
alone systems
COS
C09
Seperote north ond
south transmission
backbone
One notional
transmission
backbone
Figure 26. Investment range for the different levers when only considering mini-grids ond
stand-alone PVs,
Figure 25. Total investment for the main scenarios. Showing the minimum value 25th percentile,
median, 75th percentile and the maximum value.
59
60
=== PAGE 34 ===
APPENDIX G
"Business as usual" separate mini-grids and stand-alone PV
technologies only
Table 26. Regional breakdown on investment needs ond technology split
Seperate north and south transmission backbone
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
Figure 27. Investment range for the different levers with a split north and south HV backbone.
One national transmission backbone
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
Figure 28. Total investment for the different levers with a national HV backbone.
Region
Bari
Awdol
Sonoog
Saaxil
Woqooyi Golbeed
Togdheer
Sool
Nugoal
Mudug
Galguduud
Hiiraon
Bakool
Gedo
Boy
Shabeelloho Dhexe
Shabeelloho Hoose
Banaodir
Jubbodo Dhexe
Jubbodo Hoose
Totol
Population
Existing mini-grids New mini-grids Stand-alone PV Existing mini-grids
Investments (Total)
New mini-grids Stand-alone PV
460,000
193,000
82,000
80,000
423,000
109,000
279,000
396,000
327,000
437,000
74,000
369,000
701,000
166,000
358,000
35,000
508,000
71,000
7,000
40,000
18,000
33,000
108,000
65,000
38,000
139,000
139,000
103,000
101,000
146,000
216,000
480,000
5,000
217,000
215,000
284,000
161,000
308,000
81,000
880,000
729,000
233,000
136,000
392,000
552,000
606,000
459,000
547,000
841,000
25,000
190,000
204,000
77,9
24,3
139.7
50.6
10.3
45.8
63
47.6
30.7
10.1
53,5
70,6
20
25,9
416.6
65.1
1,174
0.8
2.2
3.7
12.4
6.3
4.3
15.8
14.8
16,4
41,2
0.7
23
22.8
233
26.9
13.7
8.5
18.1
15.7
37.3
22
22.6
85
58,5
75,4
1.3
10.7
13
436
Inclusion of a potential split north and south transmission backbone
Region
Bari
Awdal
Sonoog
Soaxil
Woqooyi Golbeed
Togdheer
Sool
Nugaol
Mudug
Galguduud
Hiiraan
Bokool
Gedo
Bay
Shabeellaha Dhexe
Shabeellaha Hoose
Banaodir
Jubbodo Dhexe
Jubbodo Hoose
Transmission
backbone
Total
Population
New mini-grids Stand-alone PV Grid
Existing
Grid
358,000
24,000
405,000
13,000
237,000
104,000
141,000
110,000
477,000
Investments (Total)
Existing
Stand-alone
New
mini-grids mini-grids
mini-grids
103,000
193,000
82,000
80,000
154,000
74,000
109,000
59,000
396,000
327,000
437,000
74,000
265,000
701,000
166,000
358,000
16,000
107,000
71,000
7,000
15,000
18,000
27,000
52,000
52,000
22,000
139,000
139,000
103,000
101,000
146,000
216,000
199,000
383,000
5,000
142,000
139,000
284,000
161,000
308,000
81,000
880,000
729,000
233,000
136,000
392,000
552,000
606,000
459,000
547,000
841,000
25,000
190,000
204,000
3.9
0.3
26.9
17.9
1.8
12.7
58
12.6
760
917
67,3
24.3
9.3
9.8
114
41.9
10.3
40.8
63
47,6
30.7
10.1
51.7
70.6
20
25.9
355.8
2.5
57,7
1,053
7.1
0.8
2.1
2.2
3.1
6.3
15B
14,8
17.8
19.7
16.4
33.9
0.7
20.7
18.3
206
5.7
2.9
26.9
12.5
8.5
18.1
157
37,3
22
22,6
85
58.5
71.2
1.3
10.7
13
430
Total
93
20.3
15.5
170.4
76.6
25.1
54,1
96.9
78
77,8
40,9
175,3
142.5
418.5
36.7
100.9
1,842
Total
30.9
21.3
15.1
171
78.6
25.6
54.1
78
77,8
40,9
94.1
175.3
94.9
143.7
415.7
37.2
101.6
760
2,606
62
=== PAGE 35 ===
Inclusion of a potential integrated national transmission backbone
APPENDIX H
Appendix H - Potential priority locations
The table below lists potential priority locations for new mini-grids, prioritized based on population size
and estimated electricity demand,
Table 27, Potential priority locations per region.
Region
Bari
Awdal
Sanoag
Saaxil
Woqooyi Galbeed
Togdheer
Sool
Nugaol
Mudug
Galguduud
Hiiroan
Bakool
Gedo
Bay
Shabeelloha Dhexe
Shabeelloha Hoose
Bonaodir
Jubbado Dhexe
Jubbado Hoose
Transmission lines
Total
63
population
Existing New mini-grids Stand-alone PV
Grid
358,000
24,000
405,000
13,000
302,000
361,000
212,000
322,000
104,000
197,000
141,000
110,000
477,000
Grid
1
0.3
26.9
17.9
1.8
10.3
14.9
7.6
1
2.1
7.9
12,7
58.2
3.3
12.6
1280
1,478
Investments (Million USD)
Existing
Stand-alone
New
mini-grids mini-grids
mini-grids
103,000
193,000
82,000
80,000
154,000
74,000
109,000
7,000
98,000
136,000
136,000
74,000
265,000
701,000
25,000
358,000
16,000
107,000
71,000
7,000
15,000
18,000
27,000
52,000
52,000
9,000
76,000
117,000
82,000
101,000
146,000
216,000
150,000
383,000
3,000
142,000
139,000
284,000
161,000
308,000
81,000
880,000
729,000
233,000
136,000
392,000
552,000
606,000
459,000
547,000
833,000
25,000
190,000
204,000
67,3
24.3
9.3
9.8
114
41.9
10.3
39.5
55.9
42.7
26,3
10.1
51.7
70.6
17.7
25.9
355,8
2.5
57.7
1,033
7.1
0.8
2.1
2.2
3.1
8.8
12
7.8
8.9
17.8
19.7
12.9
33.9
20.7
18.3
189
7.9
2.9
26.9
12.5
8.5
18.1
15.7
37,3
22
22.6
85
57,7
10.7
13
429
Total
93.3
30.9
21.3
78.6
25.6
54.8
97.8
78
78.3
40.9
94.1
175.3
96.1
143.7
415.7
37.2
101.6
1280
3,129
Region
Bakool
Bari
Bay
Galguduud
Gedo
Hiiraan
Jubbada Dhexe
Jubbada Hoose
Name
Buur Dhuxunle
Goras Wiine
Rab Dhuure
Tayeeglow
Corto
Dongoroyo
Kala-Beyr
Loas Dawaco
Samaysa Dheer
Southern Koom IDP sites
Waaciye
Xidda
Axmed Gurey
Miisra
Uffurow
Ceel Buur
Ceel Dheer
Gol-Hareri
Golinsoor
Jowlo
Wabxo
Beled Aamin
Ceel Boon
South Doolow
Tuulo Barwaaqo Tubaolo BQ
Adan Yoboal
Booco
Ceel Cali
Matabaan
DujuumQ-HQkgan-Wubuale
Kuunyo-Barrow
Saakow
Salagle
Jamaame
Mcheruole
Longtitude
43.24402
43.48473
43.16362
44.50925
49.07439
49.34052
49.25355
49.0838B
49.09003
49.0766B
49.04446
49.05387
43.19677
43.08199
4289046
46.6211B
47.17986
47.14662
46.70961
415159
46.28471
41.8937
42.91654
4206686
4215403
46.24666
45.89552
45.52641
42,576B
43.88408
4245886
42.28748
42.74992
4277959
Latitude
4.054153
4263102
4.845266
4.011166
10.49419
8.723642
10.82907
10.46964
9,862535
9.480818
10.00997
9.954911
3.214713
2.59359B
2.762752
4.686113
3.849763
4531139
6.426481
4.659247
4513682
3.95561
3,7342B2
4.14789B
3.503132
3.777834
4.329268
4.192876
5.199398
1.251671
0.79463
1.63953
1.810476
0.070697
0248972
Population
22,000
11,000
12,000
22,000
6,000
10,000
4,000
5,000
10,000
8,000
11,000
7,000
47,000
15,000
49,000
12,000
17,000
30,000
10,000
11,000
9,000
12,000
33,000
12,000
9,000
8,000
9,000
17,000
13,000
16,000
20,000
46,000
19,000
30,000
11,000
64
=== PAGE 36 ===
Djibouti
1 Dire
Dawa
Harar
Region
Mudug
Nugaol
Saoxil
Sonaog
Shobeellaha
Dhexe
Shabeelloha
Hoose
Sool
Togdheer
Woqooyi
Galbeed
o
OQOOO
O
Name
Horardhere
Joriiban
South Goalkacyo
Wisil
Jolom
South-east Goroowe
Sheekh Abdol
Dhohar
Laosqoroy
Coli-Goudud
Duduble
Gululei
Rage-Celle
Xooji-Cali
Afgoi
Jonoole
Mubaorol<
Kola Boydh
North-eastern Burco
North-western Burco
Suuryo Qansox
WidhWidh
Ceel-Boxoy
Mooge B
Sonaog
QarO'0
NugoaJ
Longtitude
48.85054
47.43248
48.12131
48.04157
48.52102
44.69587
48.82122
48.19663
46.43566
45.53325
45.54294
45.3543
46.01028
46.21739
44.9923
44.77234
47.22651
45.57321
45.53667
45.52047
46.70747
43.64399
Latitude
4.65534
7.212774
6.692419
5.427524
7.869644
8.393007
9.9519
9.750248
11.15912
3.178532
3.148155
3.182084
2.448979
2.657704
2.922761
1.98359
1.808916
1.917818
8.239163
9.542553
9.561257
9.578987
8.45399
9.658098
9.51261
Population
20,000
12,000
11,000
11,000
9,000
16,000
9,000
21,000
5,000
9,000
5,000
4,000
5,000
5,000
5,000
14,000
26,000
13,000
9,000
11,000
15,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
7,000
.4
APPENDIX I
Appendix I Spatial Data Infrastructure
A Spatial Data Infrastructure (SOI) platform has been set up for this project. This is based on a
customized version of GeoNode, The SDI provides the following key functionalities:
O
o
Ability to upload both roster ond vector datasets
Ability to establish style presets for uploaded datasets using SLD (Styled Layer Descriptor)
documents.
A permissions framework with ability to define users and groups and to assign permissions to
layers and documents on a per-user and per-group basis.
Ability to compose maps by combining different layers into o single mop view,
Ability to define metadata for each layer.
Ability to upload documents (POF, MS Word etc.) and associate them with spatial datasets,
Publishing of dato in the SDI via OGC Standards based services including:
O
O
WMS - web mapping services
WFS - web feature services
wcs - web coverage services
csw - catalogue service for the web
uudug
o S%omaaliya
Oher
Måqdiåtß
O
Underlying the SDI is a full relational database with geospatial data storage capabilities. This is used
to store vector data and provide an environment for analysis either in-database or through front-end
tools such os QGIS, The aim of the SDI is to provide o platform to support data collection, storage ond
sharing, analysis and the publishing of analysis results, The SDI is online and accessible here:
http://somalia,gep.kartoza.com/,
Features of the SDI platform
This section describes the l<ey features of the platform,
A customized landing page which presents a gallery of prepared maps: This allows the maintainers of
the platform to feature specific maps for their users.
',Z/Gode
Cheroo
rbahaoey
O
O
Bcy
Dhexe
Hoose
65
66
=== PAGE 37 ===
Data v
Viewers
SEP
Atout
tjm'jnux
Vivo v
Explore Maps
Selectea Mjc•s
Add rh.SV."i. through the
create a New Map
WELCOME TO THE
Somalia Electrification
Platform SDI
Health
faci lities
National
transmission
backbone
Figure 29, Landing page
Layer browser page:
6 Maps found
som •lia
Somalia
Transmjtion
lines
split
transmission
backbone
•.te "eve•cgegcv•
General Electrification Map
v•ew '-lag
C] Somawa Transmit•on ones
'"lth hries C hat:
2020
View '-lag
Cl National transmission backbone
future national transrrnss.•or bivoone
View „'•lac
This is used to manage the GIS layers published on the SDI and is the entry point for managing styling,
permissions and metadata of layers.
Oata v
Mao Viewers v SEP About v
Explore Layers
Selected L avers
Add
Create a Map
Filters
V.EYWORO%
GRO.'P%
t m 'ENI
tjml.nux
Upload Layers
11 Layers found
Figure 31, SDI Map browser, Maps are pre-composed collections of layers and styles,
The database underlying the GeoNode SDI contains spatial data that can be accessed from desktop GIS
such as QGIS if needed. This will be restricted to privileged users. The user can connect to the web
services published by GeoNode using the Metasearch tool in QGIS, As per the example shown below:
Desl<top GIS application integration: Because the SDI is built on open standards it is possible to connect
to it from desktop based GIS applications such as QGIS. In fact QGIS includes specific functionality to
moke it easy to interoperate with o GeoNode SDI portol instance,
Recent Projects
(7 country_boundariesl
No abstract provided
country _bounda
. No abstract provided
2020
provided
2020
Figure 30. The SDI platform layer browser
Map browser page:
This is used to browse the collection of composed maps that have been published on the system. From
this page, metadata and permissions of maps can be managed and, for those users with the correct
permissions, a link to edit the mop is provided,
67
Figure 32.
Integration with the
SDI
from the
QGIS
Desktop
GIS
application
68
=== PAGE 38 ===
QGIS also provides a tight integration with the SDI via the GeoNode data browser that Kartoza
developed previously for the World Bonk, as per the example below,
Figure 83. Working with SDI in a GIS application
For advanced users, they will be able to connect to the post GIS database using QGIS, From there they
will be able to perform local geospatial analysis with the data and generate new products, QGIS
provides a large range of analysis tools that can be used for this purpose,
The Somalia Electrification Platform is integrated into the SOI, This is described further in the results
and scenarios sections that follow,
SEP
Somalia
d•uUOOk (D
Pioi-g"ids
sveems
swtn
nat'0'S
I mten*ifvcation strategy
@ ust
- go•: lgtO
5 - 18m •
LOW mtß. teenno•es
NO usa
LOW cost. tecnnooes
target
system
Dieee
Ethiopia
Kenya
- • Somalia
Figure 34, Electrification platform results visualization page,
Somalia Electrification
Platform SDI
Styling of data
For the production of advanced
cartographic outputs, the users of the
system will be able to use QGIS to
generate sophisticated maps and reports.
The data will be styled on GeoNode using
the standards based SLD (Styled Layer
Descriptor) format. Kortoza will assist by
setting up an initial SLD style library and
including SLD creation and application of
layers within our training modules,
69
Platform customization
Kortoza, with inputs from KTH, developed
and deployed a number of customizations
to GeoNode to provide a more user-centric
experience for electrification practitioners
and to customize the look and feel of the
platform for this project, We also
integrated the SDI and Electrification
Platform into a single web site to create a
more seamless user experience as you
transition from the one platform to the
other, Electrification Platform
Sum rnarv
Moble
Sl.2d
lhVtsrNENf
146 MW
CAPAC* TY
70
=== PAGE 39 ===
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources.
SOMALI ELECTRICITY ACCESS PROJECT
