=== PAGE 1 ===
United Nations 
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
 
Security Council 
Distr.: General 
12 December 2025 
 
25-20426 (E)  
*2520426* 
 
 
 
 Resolution 2806 (2025) 
 
 
 
 Adopted by the Security Council at its 10064th meeting, on 
12 December 2025 
 
 
 
The Security Council, 
 
Recalling all its previous resolutions and statements of its President on the 
situation in Somalia, 
 
Reaffirming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political 
independence and unity of Somalia, 
 
Commending the progress made in Somalia over the past ten years, and 
especially over the past three years in the fight against Al-Shabaab, 
 
Emphasising that the purpose of this resolution is to degrade the threat posed by 
Al-Shabaab, 
 
 
 
Degrading the threat posed by Al-Shabaab, and the Arms Embargo targeting 
Al-Shabaab 
 
 
Expressing grave concern that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat to 
the peace, security and stability of Somalia and the region, and further expressing 
concern about the continued presence in Somalia of affiliates linked to ISIL/Da’esh, 
 
Condemning in the strongest possible terms Al-Shabaab’s terrorist attacks, 
expressing deep concern at the loss of life from these attacks, further condemning 
Al-Shabaab’s radicalisation to violent ends and exploitation, including financially of 
communities, and reiterating its determination to support comprehensive efforts to 
reduce the threat posed by Al-Shabaab, 
 
Strongly condemning the reported targeting of civilians by Al-Shabaab as well 
as its indiscriminate use of explosive weapons, in particular in densely populated 
areas, and the consequences for the civilian population, as recorded by the Panel of 
Experts pursuant to resolution 2713 (2023) (Panel), including in its final report 
(S/2025/777), 
 
Calling for compliance with international law, and expressing continued 
concern about all violations of international humanitarian law, in particular the 
targeting of civilians, violations of obligations related to the respect and protection of 
humanitarian personnel, and any unlawful attacks against civilian objects, and all 
violations and abuses of human rights, including those involving sexual and gender-
=== PAGE 2 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
2/14 
 
based violence in conflict, especially as related to trafficking in persons, forced 
marriage and sexual slavery in areas where Al-Shabaab is present, 
 
Expressing concern about the flow of weapons and ammunition from Yemen to 
Somalia in violation of the arms embargo targeting Al-Shabaab, and emphasising the 
importance of preventing Al-Shabaab from developing and exploiting a relationship 
with listed groups in the region, 
 
Recalling the 2025 Report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed 
Conflict (S/2025/247), noting with concern the high levels of abduction and 
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict in violation of international law, 
with almost all instances of recruitment and use and abduction of children attributed 
to Al-Shabaab, welcoming the progress made by the Somali National Army (SNA) 
and Somali National Police Force (SNPF) towards ending and preventing the 
recruitment and use of children and urging the Government of the Federal Republic 
of Somalia (GFRS) and Somalia’s Federal Member States (FMS) to further strengthen 
efforts to end and prevent the “six grave violations” against children as identified by 
the Secretary-General, including by implementing measures in line with resolutions 
1379 (2001), 1998 (2011), 2225 (2015) and 2467 (2019), 
 
Underscoring the importance of a holistic, whole-of-government and whole-of-
society approach, including the full, equal, meaningful and safe participation and 
support for leadership roles of women in Somalia, to counter terrorism and violent 
extremism conducive to terrorism, conducted in accordance with applicable 
international law, as well as efforts to address the governance, security, human rights, 
humanitarian, development and socioeconomic dimensions of the problem, including 
youth unemployment and poverty, and emphasising the importance of regional and 
international cooperation to counter terrorism, disrupt terrorist finances and illicit 
financial flows, detect and prevent terrorist travel, and stop arms trafficking,  
 
Reiterating that terrorism cannot, and should not, be associated with any 
religion, nationality, civilisation or ethnic group, condemning terrorist groups’ 
attempts to craft distorted narratives that are based on misrepresentation of religion 
to justify violence and to popularise their attempts to undermine Somalia and the 
region, expressing concern over their exploitation of information and communication 
technologies including through the Internet, particularly social media, for terrorist 
purposes, supporting the GFRS’s renewed efforts to counter Al-Shabaab’s narratives, 
and strongly encouraging Member States to work with the GFRS to prevent 
Al-Shabaab from using social media platforms for criminal purposes and to counter 
terrorist propaganda,  
 
Expressing serious concern about the humanitarian situation in Somalia, 
encouraging States to scale-up their humanitarian support to Somalia, and calling for 
all parties to the conflict to allow and facilitate, in accordance with relevant 
provisions of international law, particularly applicable international humanitarian 
law, and in a manner consistent with the United Nations guiding principles of 
humanitarian emergency assistance (United Nations General Assembly resolution 
46/182), including humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, full, safe, 
rapid and unhindered humanitarian access to all persons in need across Somalia,  
 
Recognising the contribution of Somali, African Union, and other forces 
operating legally in Somalia towards combatting Al-Shabaab, often at great sacrifice, 
and liberating areas of central Somalia from Al-Shabaab, and welcoming Somali and 
international efforts to bring stabilisation support and services to newly liberated 
communities,  
 
Noting with concern smuggling and trafficking of weapons, military equipment 
and ammunition in contravention of the measures imposed by the Security Council in
=== PAGE 3 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
3/14
25-20426 
 
this and previous resolutions, and urging the GFRS, FMS and Member States to take 
appropriate measures to identify smugglers and hold them accountable,  
 
Stressing the primary role of the Central Monitoring Department (CMD), 
established by the GFRS to provide coordination, oversight, assurance and 
monitoring of the delivery, marking, circulation and audit of weapons and 
ammunition across Somalia, with support and advice from Member States, welcoming 
the progress made by the CMD in this area, encouraging Somalia’s international 
partners to strengthen coordination with and capacity-building to the CMD as the 
primary focal point for weapons and ammunition management assistance to Somalia, 
and calling on the GFRS to continue coordinating all activities related to weapons 
and ammunition management through the CMD,  
 
Welcoming the progress made by the GFRS in developing the firearms bill and 
the counter-improvised explosive device strategy, calling on the GFRS to finalise the 
establishment of a centralised licensing authority for weapons, in accordance with 
international best practices, to strengthen oversight and ensure accountability, and 
encouraging Somalia’s international partners to continue to support the GFRS’s 
efforts to strengthen weapons and ammunition management, including through 
technical support and capacity building, as requested by the GFRS,  
 
Underscoring the need to degrade Al-Shabaab through targeted sanctions, 
preventing access to weapons and ammunition, disrupting its finances, reducing the 
threat posed by improvised explosive devices, improving maritime domain awareness 
and international collaboration,  
 
Recognising the need to continuously strengthen due process and to ensure that 
fair and clear procedures exist for delisting individuals and entities designated 
pursuant to resolution 1844 (2008) as amended, and recalling the adoption of 
resolution 2744 (2024) enhancing the mandate and procedure of the Focal Point for 
Delisting, 
 
Determining that Al-Shabaab’s attempts to undermine peace and security in 
Somalia and the region, including through acts of terrorism, constitute a threat to 
international peace and security,  
 
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, 
 
 
 
A. Targeted sanctions 
 
 
 
1. 
Recalls its decisions in its resolution 1844 (2008), which imposed targeted 
sanctions, and its resolutions 2002 (2011), 2093 (2013) and 2662 (2022), which 
expanded the listing criteria, and recalls its decisions in resolutions 2060 (2012) and 
2444 (2018); 
 
2. 
Recalls resolution 2664 (2022), which established a cross-cutting 
humanitarian exemption to asset freeze measures, including those imposed by 
paragraph 3 of resolution 1844 (2008); 
 
 
 
B. Arms embargo targeting Al-Shabaab 
 
 
 
3. 
Recalls that all Member States shall take the necessary measures to prevent 
the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of weapons and military equipment and 
the direct or indirect supply of technical assistance or training, financial and other 
assistance including investment, brokering or other financial services, related to 
military activities or to the supply, sale, transfer, manufacture, maintenance or use of 
weapons and military equipment, to Al-Shabaab, as an entity designated pursuant to
=== PAGE 4 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
4/14 
 
paragraph 1 of this resolution by the Committee pursuant to resolution 2713 (2023) 
concerning Al-Shabaab (Committee); 
 
4. 
Welcomes the launch of the updated Weapons and Ammunition 
Management Strategy of the Federal Republic of Somalia 2025-2030, and further 
notes the GFRS’s commitment to enact laws, regulations and administrative 
procedures to exercise effective control over the export, import, transit, re-transfer 
and brokering in conventional weapons and explosives in order to prevent illicit 
trafficking and diversion, including the establishment of criminal offences to deter 
and prosecute violations; 
 
5. 
Notes paragraphs 36 to 45 and 48 of this resolution, which currently 
impose additional controls to prevent Al-Shabaab from gaining access to weapons, 
ammunition and military equipment as well as measures pertaining to the FMS, 
expresses its intention to review these measures, informed by the reporting requested 
in paragraphs 50 and 51 of this resolution, and, upon its assessment that the laws, 
regulations and administrative procedures referred to in paragraph 4 of this resolution 
have been established, to, as appropriate, lift the measures in paragraphs 36 to 45 and 
48 of this resolution, and stresses the importance of ensuring any such decision 
supports the objective of preventing all terrorist groups from gaining access to 
weapons, ammunition and military equipment; 
 
6. 
Stresses that deliveries of all weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment to FMS may only be provided in coordination with and with prior 
notification to the GFRS, through the CMD to allow for appropriate review and 
consideration, in line with the relevant procedures set out in paragraphs 41 to 44 of 
this resolution, and notes the CMD’s role as the focal point for the GFRS on weapons 
and ammunition management; 
 
7. 
Welcomes the technical assessment regarding the arms embargo targeting 
Al-Shabaab (S/2025/673), commends Somalia for the progress made on the 
management, registration and documentation of weapons, ammunition, and military 
equipment, the transfer of arms and regulations related to arms control, and efforts to 
reduce the threat posed by Improvised Explosive Devices, endorses the technical 
assessment’s recommendations, within existing resources and AUSSOM’s existing 
mandate, and further encourages Somalia’s international partners, in coordination with 
relevant international agencies, as appropriate, to support the GFRS in its efforts to: 
 
a. 
implement the National Weapons and Ammunition Management strategy 
and the National Counter-IED strategy; 
 
b. 
develop overarching legislation regulating international transfers of 
conventional arms; 
 
c. 
enable the delivery of the Arms Disruption Cell’s objectives, including on 
emerging threats in arms trafficking; 
 
d. 
develop procedures to better facilitate the recording of ammunition stocks 
in the National WAM Database; 
 
e. 
develop national capacity related to maritime interdiction; and, 
 
f. 
enhance national forensic investigations capacity; 
 
8. 
Affirms that the GFRS, in cooperation with the African Union Support and 
Stabilisation Mission (AUSSOM), shall register all weapons, ammunition and 
military equipment captured or seized from Al-Shabaab in the National Captured 
Weapons Database and, with the assistance of the Panel as necessary, investigate their 
origin;
=== PAGE 5 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
5/14
25-20426 
 
 
9. 
Calls on Member States to take reasonable steps to prevent smuggling of 
weapons and ammunition into Somalia and further calls on Member States to share 
data with the GFRS, through the CMD, the Committee, the Panel, AUSSOM and 
UNTMIS, as appropriate, regarding weapons, ammunition and military equipment 
captured from Al-Shabaab and the smuggling of weapons and ammunition in violation 
of the arms embargo targeting Al-Shabaab; 
 
 
 
C. Disrupting Al-Shabaab’s finances 
 
 
 
10. Notes with concern Al-Shabaab’s ability to generate revenue and launder, 
store and transfer resources to carry out terrorism and destabilise Somalia and the 
region, and requests the GFRS, working with international partners as appropriate, to 
continue to develop and implement a comprehensive and coordinated plan to disrupt 
Al-Shabaab’s financial operations;  
 
11. Calls upon the GFRS to continue working with the FMS, Somali financial 
authorities, private sector financial institutions and the international community to:  
 
a. 
identify, assess and mitigate money laundering and terrorist financing risks 
by improving anti-money laundering (AML) and countering the financing of 
terrorism (CFT) standards, guidance, and compliance with legal frameworks, 
including those pertaining to designated non-financial businesses and professions 
(DNFBP);  
 
b. 
strengthen supervision of, and compliance with, AML and CFT regulations 
and standards across financial institutions and DNFBPs, including as related to Know 
Your Customer and customer due diligence procedures and suspicious transaction 
reporting in line with the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of 
Terrorism Act (2016), as well as the Mobile Money Regulations (2019), Targeted 
Financial Sanctions Act (2023) and relevant Financial Action Task Force 
recommendations, and encourage collaboration with the telecoms sector to reduce the 
risk of exploitation of the mobile money sector by Al-Shabaab;  
 
c. 
continue constructive engagement with the ongoing Middle East and North 
Africa Financial Action Task Force Mutual Evaluation (MENAFATF) process, 
including scheduling an onsite evaluation to maintain progress on priority areas 
relating to terrorist financing and money laundering risks;  
 
d. 
prioritise the continued development of a secure and inclusive national 
identification system that improves financial access while countering the financing of 
terrorism;  
 
e. 
improve monitoring, reporting and investigations into money laundering 
and terrorist financing, including continuing to build financial crime investigative 
capacity across law enforcement agencies and enhancing inter-agency coordination 
and collaboration; and,  
 
f. 
develop a plan to mitigate the risks posed by Al-Shabaab to personnel 
working in AML and CFT roles within national competent authorities and the private 
sector, and a plan to protect those who share information relating to Al-Shabaab’s 
extortion tactics;  
 
12. Requests the GFRS, the Panel and relevant UN entities to continue 
exchanging information about Al-Shabaab’s operations and, with support from the 
international community, implement a comprehensive and coordinated action plan to 
disrupt Al-Shabaab’s operations and exploitation of the licit financial system, 
strengthen implementation of the draft Roadmap for Enhanced Inter-Agency
=== PAGE 6 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
6/14 
 
Cooperation to Combat Illicit Trade and its Effects and develop a plan to disrupt all 
illicit trade from which Al-Shabaab profits;  
 
13. Encourages continued cooperation at the regional and international level 
to address the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to Somalia and the region including 
continued support to Somalia’s efforts to address money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks, and further encourages international cooperation with relevant UN 
agencies supporting regional countries in their efforts to counter terrorism and violent 
extremism conducive to terrorism; 
 
 
 
D. Charcoal Ban 
 
 
 
14. Reaffirms its decision to ban the import and export of Somali charcoal, as 
set out in paragraph 22 of its resolution 2036 (2012), and paragraphs 11 to 21 of 
resolution 2182 (2014); 
 
15. Welcomes measures taken by the GFRS, FMS and Member States to reduce 
the export of charcoal from Somalia, reaffirms the importance of the efforts to monitor 
and disrupt the export and import of charcoal to and from Somalia, and encourages 
Somalia to continue to ensure the sustainable management of domestic charcoal 
production, with support from other partners, as appropriate; 
 
 
 
E. Reducing the threat posed by Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) 
 
 
 
16. Welcomes the GFRS’s adoption of the National Counter-IED Strategy 
2025-2030 and encourages its full implementation; 
 
17. Recalls that, in line with the National Counter-IED Strategy, all States 
shall prevent the direct or indirect sale, supply or transfer of the items in Part I of 
Annex B to this resolution to Somalia from their territories or by their nationals 
outside their territories, or using their flag vessels or aircraft if there is sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate that the item(s) will be used, or a significant risk exists that 
they may be used, in the manufacture in Somalia of improvised explosive devices;  
 
18. Reaffirms that: 
 
a. 
prior to transferring any items in Part I of Annex B to Somalia, the 
supplying Member State of the items shall notify the GFRS for its awareness;  
 
b. 
where an item in Part I of Annex B is directly or indirectly sold, supplied 
or transferred to Somalia consistent with paragraph 18, the supplying State shall 
notify the GFRS for its awareness of the sale, supply or transfer no more than 15 
working days after the sale, supply or transfer takes place, and that the GFRS shall 
subsequently notify the Committee within 15 working days, and stresses the 
importance that notifications pursuant to this paragraph contain all relevant 
information, including:  
 
i. 
purpose of the use of the item(s);  
 
ii. 
end user;  
 
iii. 
specifications;  
 
iv. 
quantity of the item(s); and,  
 
v. 
intended storage location;
=== PAGE 7 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
7/14
25-20426 
 
 
19. Calls upon Member States to support the GFRS in implementing 
appropriate legislation to regulate and monitor the import and transit of items listed 
in Parts I and II of Annex B;  
 
20. Calls upon Member States to undertake appropriate measures to promote 
the exercise of vigilance by their nationals, persons subject to their jurisdiction and 
firms incorporated in their territory or subject to their jurisdiction that are involved 
in the sale, supply, or transfer of explosive precursors and materials to Somalia that 
may be used in the manufacture of improvised explosive devices, including, among 
other things, items in Part II of Annex B, to keep records of transactions and share 
information with Somalia, the Committee and the Panel regarding suspicious 
purchases of or enquiries into these chemicals by individuals in Somalia and to ensure 
that Somalia is provided with adequate financial and technical assistance to establish 
appropriate safeguards for the storage and distribution of materials;  
 
21. Encourages international and regional partners of Somalia to implement 
continued specialist training of Explosive Ordnance Disposal teams and to provide 
appropriate equipment and coordinate support to reinforce Somali capacity in the 
analysis of explosives and tracing the origin and chain of custody of IEDs and their 
components; 
 
 
 
F. Maritime interdiction and maritime domain awareness 
 
 
 
22. Decides to renew, until 30 November 2026, the provisions set out in 
paragraphs 15 and 17 of resolution 2182 (2014), and expanded by paragraph 5 of 
resolution 2607 (2021) to cover IED components, as most recently renewed by 
paragraph 23 of resolution 2776 (2025); 
 
23. Affirms that the maritime interdiction and maritime domain awareness 
measures renewed by paragraph 22 of this resolution do not otherwise hinder the 
sovereign right of Somalia to enter into bilateral agreements with Member States on 
maritime security cooperation; 
 
24. Encourages Member States and regional and international organisations 
that have the capacity to do so to support the GFRS, at its request, to: 
 
a. 
strengthen its maritime domain awareness and enforcement, including in 
relation to the role of fishing vessels in trafficking and illicit trade and maritime 
movements of licit and illicit goods that lend support to Al-Shabaab; and, 
 
b. 
improve law enforcement and counter-smuggling at ports, through the 
extension of capacity-building;  
 
25. Expresses its intention to review and revise the provisions in this 
resolution on maritime interdictions and maritime domain awareness and take 
appropriate action regarding extension or modification of these provisions, no later 
than 30 November 2026; 
 
 
 
G. Panel of Experts and Security Council Committee 
 
 
 
26. Decides to renew, with effect from the date of adoption of this resolution 
until 31 December 2026, the Panel, to consist of up to 5 members, appropriately 
located with due consideration for mandate implementation and administrative 
requirements, with the following mandate:
=== PAGE 8 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
8/14 
 
 
a. 
to conduct the tasks referred to in paragraphs 8 and 12 of this resolution; 
 
b. 
to assist the Committee in monitoring the implementation of the measures 
detailed in paragraphs 1, 3, 14, 17, 18, 20, 22 and 36 of this resolution, including by 
reporting any information on violations; 
 
c. 
to give recommendations to the Committee on how to support the GFRS 
in reducing the smuggling of weapons and ammunition, 
 
d. 
to give recommendations to the Committee on how to address sexual 
violence in conflict and the “six grave violations” against children as identified by 
the Secretary-General, in line with S/2024/751; 
 
e. 
to investigate Al-Shabaab’s acquisition of components used in the 
manufacture of IEDs; 
 
f. 
to investigate Al-Shabaab’s access to and use of weapons, ammunition and 
military equipment, including IEDs, and emerging threats in arms smuggling, and 
work closely with the Committee on recommendations for measures to improve 
overall compliance with this resolution; 
 
g. 
to investigate, in coordination with relevant UN entities, all activities used 
by Al-Shabaab to generate revenues, including the use of charcoal as a revenue 
source; 
 
h. 
to investigate the organisational structure of Al-Shabaab, including its 
senior leadership structures, as well as its methods of recruitment and training; 
 
i. 
to include in its reports to the Committee any information relevant to the 
potential designation of individuals and entities pursuant to paragraph 1 of this 
resolution for possible future measures by the Council; and,  
 
j. 
to assist the Committee in compiling narrative summaries of reasons for 
listing, to be made accessible on the Committee’s website, after individuals and 
entities designated pursuant to paragraph 1 of this resolution are added to the list; 
 
27. Requests the Secretary-General to include relevant dedicated expertise on 
the Panel in line with paragraph 11 of resolution 2467 (2019) and further requests the 
Panel to apply this expertise across all aspects of its investigations and reporting; 
 
28. Recalls the importance of full co-operation between Member States and 
the Panel, requests the GFRS to facilitate for the Panel interviews of suspected 
members of Al-Shabaab and other persons of interest held in custody, and stresses the 
importance of the Panel carrying out their mandate in line with document S/2006/997; 
 
29. Reiterates its request for Member States and AUSSOM to provide 
information to the Panel, and assist them in their investigations; and, 
 
a. 
requests the GFRS to facilitate, on the basis of written requests to the 
GFRS by the Panel, access for the Panel to armouries, military storage facilities in 
SNA sectors and captured weaponry in Somali custody, and to facilitate photographs 
of weapons and ammunition held in Somali custody and access to logbooks and 
distribution records; 
 
b. 
encourages the Panel to coordinate and work closely with the CMD on 
paragraph 29.a; 
 
c. 
urges the GFRS, AUSSOM and partners to share information with the 
Panel regarding conduct or activities, in particular on illicit flows of finances, 
charcoal, weapons, ammunition and military equipment by Al-Shabaab, where 
covered by listing criteria for targeted sanctions;
=== PAGE 9 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
9/14
25-20426 
 
 
d. 
encourages the Panel, with due regard for its impartiality and 
confidentiality obligations, to engage regularly with the GFRS, in line with document 
S/2006/997 and the mandate in paragraph 26 of this resolution; 
 
e. 
urges the GFRS to facilitate, in support of the implementation of the 
Panel’s mandate, engagement between the Panel and relevant authorities, including 
as relates to paragraph 29.c; and, 
 
f. 
encourages Member States to engage and share information with the Panel 
on individuals supporting Al-Shabaab through propaganda, financing, recruitment, 
materiel support and other means; 
 
30. Encourages Somalia, Member States, and regional and subregional 
organisations to provide regular inputs to the Committee regarding the 
implementation and monitoring of the sanctions regime, and stresses that requests 
regarding frameworks for cooperation and engagement with the Panel should be 
directed to the Committee; 
 
31. Requests the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children 
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative for Sexual Violence in Conflict 
to share relevant information with the GFRS and the Committee in accordance with 
paragraph 7 of resolution 1960 (2010), paragraph 9 of resolution 1998 (2011) and 
paragraph 12 of resolution 2467 (2019), and invites the Office of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Human Rights to share relevant information with the GFRS 
and the Committee, and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to 
communicate to the Committee pertinent information, in writing, with regard to 
paragraph 43 (e) of resolution 2093 (2013), as appropriate; 
 
32. Requests the Panel to provide: 
 
a. 
regular updates to the Committee, in collaboration with independent 
experts appointed to help the work of other sanctions committees and relevant UN 
entities, as and when appropriate, including detailed investigations where relevant 
and one thematic report by 30 June 2026; 
 
b. 
a comprehensive mid-term update; and  
 
c. 
for the Security Council’s consideration through the Committee, a final 
report by 31 October 2026; 
 
and urges the Panel to seek feedback from the Committee on the findings of 
their reporting; 
 
33. Requests the Panel to include in its reporting a specific update on 
Al-Shabaab’s use of charcoal as a revenue source; 
 
34. Decides that briefings from the Chair of the Committee pursuant to 
resolution 2713 (2023) to the Security Council shall take place on an annual basis and 
before 30 November 2026; 
 
35. Expresses its intention to review the mandate of the Panel and take 
appropriate action regarding any extension and modification of this mandate, no later 
than 30 November 2026; 
 
 
 
H. Preventing Al-Shabaab from accessing weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment 
 
 
 
36. Reaffirms paragraph 4 of resolution 2776 (2025);
=== PAGE 10 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
10/14 
 
 
37. Encourages the GFRS to share with the Committee a list of licenced 
private security companies operating in Somalia that shall be allowed to import 
weapons, ammunition and military equipment required for static and mobile 
protection;  
 
38. Emphasises Somalia’s sovereign right to govern the entry into its territory 
of weapons, ammunition and military equipment, consistent with this resolution, and 
encourages the GFRS to ensure that private security companies operating in Somalia 
obtain requisite approval from the GFRS before importing weapons, ammunition and 
military equipment;  
 
39. Reaffirms that the measures referenced in paragraph 36 do not apply to 
supplies of weapons, ammunition or military equipment intended solely for the 
support of, or use by:  
 
a. 
GFRS;  
 
b. 
SNA;  
 
c. 
NISA;  
 
d. 
SNPF; and,  
 
e. 
the Somali Custodial Corps;  
 
40. Reaffirms that the measures referenced in paragraph 36 shall not apply to 
supplies of weapons, ammunition or military equipment intended solely for the 
support of, or use by:  
 
a. 
United Nations personnel, including UNTMIS and UNSOS;  
 
b. 
AUSSOM, and the Troop- and Police-Contributing Countries to 
AUSSOM; and,  
 
c. 
European Union training and support activities, Türkiye, the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as 
well as any other Member State forces, with a status of forces agreement or a 
memorandum of understanding with the GFRS, provided that they inform the 
Committee, for information purposes only, about the existence of such agreements;  
 
41. Decides that deliveries of items in Annex A to this resolution to FMS, or 
to licenced private security companies operating in Somalia as defined in the list 
requested in paragraph 37 of this resolution, for the purpose of supporting the FMS 
and licensed private security companies in countering Al-Shabaab or to provide 
security for international and commercial premises and personnel in Somalia, may 
only be provided in coordination with the GFRS and in the absence of a negative 
decision by the Committee within five working days of receiving a notification in 
accordance with the process set out in paragraph 43 of this resolution;  
 
42. Decides that deliveries of all weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment not covered by Annex A to this resolution to FMS, or to licenced private 
security companies operating in Somalia as defined in the list requested in paragraph 
37 of this resolution, for the purpose of supporting the FMS and licensed private 
security companies in countering Al-Shabaab or to provide security for international 
and commercial premises and personnel in Somalia, may only be provided in 
coordination with the GFRS and are subject to notification to the Committee, for 
information only, at least five working days in advance in accordance with the process 
set out in paragraph 43 of this resolution;  
 
43. Reaffirms that all notifications should include:
=== PAGE 11 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
11/14
25-20426 
 
 
a. 
details of the manufacturer and supplier of the weapons, ammunition and 
military equipment, including type, lot/batch and serial numbers;  
 
b. 
a description of the arms and ammunition including the type, calibre and 
quantity;  
 
c. 
proposed date and place of delivery; and  
 
d. 
all relevant information concerning the intended destination unit, or the 
intended place of storage;  
 
44. Decides that, prior to delivering any weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment to FMS, or to licenced private security companies operating in Somalia, 
for the purpose of supporting the FMS and licensed private security companies in 
countering Al-Shabaab or to provide security for international and commercial 
premises and personnel in Somalia, the supplying Member State of the items shall 
notify the GFRS to allow for appropriate review and consideration, notes the CMD’s 
role as the focal point for the GFRS on weapons and ammunition management, 
emphasises Somalia’s sovereign right to govern the entry into its territory of weapons, 
ammunition and military equipment, consistent with this resolution, and affirms that 
the GFRS has the primary responsibility to notify the Committee pursuant to 
paragraphs 41 and 42, of any deliveries of weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment to Somalia, within five working days of receiving notification from the 
supplying Member State;  
 
45. Reaffirms that to further avoid Al-Shabaab obtaining weapons and 
ammunition, weapons, ammunition and military equipment sold or supplied in 
accordance with paragraphs 39, 40, 41 and 42 of this resolution shall not be resold to, 
transferred to, or made available for use by any individual or entity not in the service 
of the recipient to which it was originally sold or supplied, or the selling or supplying 
State or international, regional or subregional organisation and requests the 
Committee to share all notifications pertaining to paragraphs 41 and 42 submitted to 
the Committee with the CMD and the Office of National Security, for their 
information;  
 
46. Requests the Committee, in cooperation with the GFRS, to develop, 
produce and disseminate templates for notifications to the Committee pursuant to 
paragraphs 18.b, 41, 42 and 44; 
 
47. Requests the Secretariat to support the GFRS’ dissemination efforts in 
relation to the control of arms, ammunition and related materiel in the local language, 
if necessary, within its existing resources;  
 
48. Reaffirms that the measures referenced in paragraph 36 shall not apply to:  
 
a. 
supplies of protective clothing, including flak jackets and military helmets, 
temporarily exported to Somalia by United Nations personnel, representatives of the 
media, private security contractors and humanitarian and development workers and 
associated personnel for their personal use only;  
 
b. 
the delivery of non-lethal military equipment by States, or international, 
regional or subregional organisations intended solely for humanitarian or protective 
use; and  
 
c. 
entry into Somali ports for temporary visits of vessels carrying weapons 
and military equipment for defensive purposes provided that such items remain at all 
times aboard such vessels;
=== PAGE 12 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
12/14 
 
 
I. Reporting 
 
 
 
49. Requests the GFRS, following consultation through the structures of the 
National Security Architecture and Somali Security Development Plan, to provide to 
the Security Council, by 31 May 2026 and then by 31 October 2026, reports which 
include:  
 
a. 
a description of the infrastructure in place to ensure the safe storage, 
registration, maintenance and distribution of weapons, ammunition and military 
equipment, and any capacity building requirements in this regard;  
 
b. 
a description of the procedures and codes of conduct in place for the 
registration, distribution, use and storage of weapons, and any capacity building 
requirements in this regard;  
 
c. 
the reports of the Joint Verification Team (JVT) requested in paragraph 7 
of resolution 2182 (2014) and paragraph 37 of resolution 2551 (2020);  
 
d. 
an update summarising suspicious activity documented by domestic 
financial institutions, and investigations and actions undertaken by the Financial 
Reporting Centre to counter the financing of terrorism and in a manner so as to protect 
the confidentiality of sensitive information; and,  
 
e. 
an update on specific actions taken to counter the financing of terrorism in 
Somalia;  
 
50. Requests the GFRS, in the second report requested in paragraph 49 of this 
resolution, to further include an update on implementation of the National Weapons 
and Ammunition Management strategy, including progress towards the establishment 
and implementation of the laws, regulations and administrative procedures referred 
to in paragraph 4 of this resolution; 
 
51. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Security Council, by 
31 October 2026, a technical assessment regarding the arms embargo targeting 
Al-Shabaab, in consultation with the GFRS, relevant UN entities as appropriate and 
other relevant stakeholders, including further updates on the key areas included in 
document S/2025/673, with specific recommendations as appropriate; 
 
52. Requests the organisations and states listed in paragraph 40.c of this 
resolution, or subsequently added, to provide to the Security Council, and to the CMD 
and the Office of National Security, by 31 October 2026, an update on the support 
provided to Somalia since the adoption of this resolution and detail of the weapons, 
ammunition and military equipment imported in the reporting period;  
 
53. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
=== PAGE 13 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025)
 
13/14
25-20426 
 
 
 Annex A – Items subject to a no-objection process1 
 
 
1. 
Surface to air missiles, including Man-Portable Air-Defence Systems 
(MANPADS); 
2. 
Weapons with a calibre greater than 12.7 mm, and components specially 
designed for these, and associated ammunition;  
 
a. 
Note: This does not include shoulder fired anti-tank rocket launchers such 
as RPGs or LAWs (light anti-tank weapon), recoilless rifles, rifle grenades, or 
grenade launchers;  
3. 
Mortars with a calibre greater than 82 mm and associated ammunition; 
4. 
Anti-tank guided weapons, including Anti-tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs) and 
ammunition and components specially designed for these items; 
5. 
Charges and devices specifically designed or modified for military use; mines 
and related materiel; and fuses; 
6. 
Weapon sights with a night vision capability, including thermal and infrared, 
and accessories; 
7. 
Fixed wing, swivel wing, tilt rotor or tilt wing aircraft, specifically designed or 
modified for military use; 
8. 
‘Vessels’ and amphibious vehicles specifically designed or modified for military 
use; 
 
a. 
Note: ‘Vessel’ includes any ship, surface effect vehicle, vessel of small 
waterplane area or hydrofoil and the hull or part of the hull of a vessel;  
9. 
Uncrewed combat aerial vehicles (listed as Category IV in the UN Register of 
Conventional Arms).
__________________ 
 
1  (Not applicable to the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Somali National 
Army, the Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency, the Somali National Police Force 
and the Somali Custodial Corps).
=== PAGE 14 ===
S/RES/2806 (2025) 
 
25-20426
14/14 
 
 
 Annex B – Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) Components 
 
 
 
 Explosive materials, explosives precursors, explosive-related 
equipment, and related technology 
 
 
 
 Part I1 
 
 
1. 
Explosive materials and precursors, as follows, and mixtures containing one or 
more thereof: 
 
a. 
Nitrocellulose (containing more than 12.5% nitrogen w/w); 
 
b. 
Trinitrophenylmethylnitramine (tetryl); 
 
c. 
Nitroglycerin (except when packaged/prepared in individual medicinal 
doses); 
 
d. 
Nitric acid; 
 
e. 
Sulphuric acid; 
2. 
Explosive-related goods: 
 
a. 
Equipment and devices specially designed to initiate explosives by 
electrical or non-electrical means (e.g. firing sets, detonators, igniters, 
detonating chord); 
 
b. 
“Technology” required for the “production” or “use” of the items listed at 
paragraphs 1 and 2 (a); 
 
 
 
 
Part II 
 
 
1. 
Explosive materials, as follows, and mixtures containing one or more thereof: 
 
a. 
Ammonium Nitrate Fuel Oil (ANFO); 
 
b. 
Nitroglycol; 
 
c. 
Pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN); 
 
d. 
Picryl chloride; 
 
e. 
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene (TNT); 
2. 
Explosives precursors: 
 
a. 
Ammonium nitrate; 
 
b. 
Potassium nitrate; 
 
c. 
Sodium chlorate; 
3. 
Dual use items identified by the Panel: 
 
a. 
Alarm systems with disturbance sensors, including motorcycle alarms; 
4. 
Learning code receivers. 
 
__________________ 
 
1  To be notified to Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia in advance of intended 
shipment.
