=== PAGE 1 ===
I
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND IRRIGATION 
 
 
 
NATIONAL IRRIGATION POLICY 
 
 
 
 
2019
=== PAGE 2 ===
II 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   
 III 
FOREWORD   
 IV 
1 INTRODUCTION   
 1 
1.1  Country Context   
 1 
1.2 Background   
 
2 
1.3  History of Irrigation Context of Somalia   
 3 
1.4  Challenges of Irrigation Sector   
 5 
1.5  Opportunities of Irrigation sector in Somalia   
 8 
1.6  Rationale for Irrigation Policy   
 9 
2  THE NATIONAL IRRIGATION POLICY AND STRATEGY   
 10 
2.1  Policy Vision   
 10 
2.2  Policy Mission   
 10 
2.3  Goal and Objective of the Policy   
 
10 
2.3.1  Goal of the Policy   
 
10 
2.3.2  Objective of the Policy   
 10 
2.3  Policy Outcomes   
 
11 
2.4  Policy Priority and Target Areas   
 12 
2.4.1  Institutional Capacity Development   
 12 
2.4.2 Rehabilitation of Existing Irrigation Infrastructure/Schemes   
 15 
2.4.3  Sustainable Irrigation Development   
 17 
2.4.4  Sustainable Irrigation Management   
 19 
2.4.5  Irrigation Research and Information Management   
 20 
3 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT FOR POLICY IMPLEMENTATION   
 23 
3.1  Roles and Responsibilities at Different Levels   
 23 
3.1.1  National Level   
 23 
3.1.2  State Level   
 25 
3.1.3  Private Sector    
 25 
4 COORDINATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION   
 30 
4.1  Coordination Process   
 30 
4.2  Monitoring and Evaluation   
 30 
4.3  Cross-Cutting Issues    
 31 
List of Figures: 
Figure 1.1 Map of geographical location of barrages and irrigation schemes   
 4
=== PAGE 3 ===
III 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
The National Irrigation Policy was prepared under the overall leadership of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation in partnership with the Federal Member States and the Banadir 
Regional Administration. The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation of Federal Government 
of Somalia expresses its heartfelt gratitude and sincere respect to Department for 
International Development (DFID) for the financial support through Development 
Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) under the project of Promoting Inclusive Markets in Somalia 
(PIMS) 
to 
draft 
the 
National 
Irrigation 
Policy 
and 
also 
to 
conduct 
the 
consultation/validation meetings in the Federal Member States and Banadir Regional 
Administration, and finally to submit the policy into the cabinet for further approval 
process. 
 
Special mention goes to the Ministry staff who played the crucial role in the preparation 
and validation of the policy. Last but not least, many thanks go to all the members of the 
stakeholders of the Federal State Members and Banadir Regional Administration who 
participated in the consultative and validation workshops and gave their time and the 
invaluable contribution providing the critical feedback on draft version of the National 
Irrigation Policy.
=== PAGE 4 ===
IV 
 
FOREWORD 
 
The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation has the mandate and responsibility for 
management, development, coordination and reconstruction of Agriculture and Irrigation 
sector in Somalia whose institutions, and infrastructure and farms were destroyed during 
the years of civil strife. It is also mandated to establish an enabling environment that will 
encourage, facilitate and promote agriculture, value-addition, and agriculture business 
opportunities. Agriculture is the dominant sector of the Somalia economy and its 
performance is the major determinant of overall GDP growth rate. The sector has crucial 
role in ensuring food security, job creation, income generation and foreign exchange 
earnings. In fact, an estimated 70% of the country’s population, more than 8.5 million, live 
in rural areas and derive their livelihoods from agriculture, livestock and related activities. 
 
Currently, government gives emphasis to develop the irrigation sub-sector to fully tap its 
potentials by assisting and supporting farmers to improve irrigation management 
practices and the promotion of modern irrigation systems. As a result of the prolonged 
civil war, most of the prewar infrastructure for flood control and irrigation (embankments, 
gates, canals, and water reservoirs) has not been maintained and is not currently 
functioning adequately. On this basis, The Federal Republic of Somalia found it is 
necessary to enact the National Irrigation Policy due to the unregulated and mismanaged 
irrigation sector, traditional irrigation practices, and alarming water shortages in the 
Shabelle and Juba river basins. 
 
Whilst recognizing the numerous challenges facing irrigation development, the overall 
goal of this policy is to contribute to sustainable economic growth and development by 
enhancing irrigated agricultural production. The policy focuses on four priority areas, 
namely; Institutional capacity development within the irrigation sector at both the National 
and State level, Rehabilitation of existing irrigation infrastructure and development of new 
schemes, Sustainable Irrigation Development and Management, and Irrigation Research 
and Information Management. 
 
It is my firm conviction that the policy will be critical in attaining economic and social 
development of Somalia. It is pertinent, therefore, that all sectors of the economy play 
their respective roles to transform Somalia by being committed to the implementation of 
this Policy. 
 
 
 
 
Hon. Said Hussein Iid 
Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation 
Federal Government of Somalia
=== PAGE 5 ===
1 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
1.1 Country Context 
 
 
Somalia is a country situated in the Horn of Africa that covers an area of 637,660 km2. It 
has the longest coastline on the African continent (3333.333 km) and its terrain consists 
mainly of plateaus, plains, and highlands. The country is bordered by the Gulf of Aden to 
the north, the Indian Ocean to the east, Kenya to the south, Ethiopia to the west and 
Djibouti to the north-west. The climate in Somalia is mainly arid to semi-arid, with an 
average annual daytime temperature of 27ºC. It is hot and dry in the interior and on the 
Gulf of Aden, but cooler on the Indian Ocean coast and inland on the river floodplains. 
The mean annual precipitation is 282 mm, with 50 mm along the northern coast, 150 mm 
in the interior plateau and 350-500 mm in the southwest. 
 
The bimodal rainfall pattern has two rainy seasons, the Gu (April to June) and the Deyr 
(October to December), and two dry seasons, the Hagaa (July to September) and the 
Jilaal (January to March). The population relies on the long Gu rains and the shorter, but 
important, Deyr rains for agricultural production, pasture regeneration, and the 
replenishment of rivers, dams, and ground water supply. Traditionally, the Gu was the 
main rainy season. However, there has been a general decline in long rains, explaining 
the frequency of drought and floods in the Horn of Africa. Historical trends show that 
droughts occur regularly at intervals of 2-3 years in the Deyr and 8-10 years in 
consecutive Deyr and Gu seasons, extending seasonal hardships. Currently, there are 
recurrent droughts due to climate change and variability. 
 
The agriculture sector is the backbone of the Somali economy. Agriculture is the dominant 
sector of the Somalia economy and its performance is the major determinant of overall 
GDP growth rate. The agricultural sector has a crucial role in ensuring food security, job 
creation, income generation, and foreign exchange earnings. Indeed, about 70% of the 
country’s population lives in rural areas and derives its livelihood from agriculture and 
related activities. The agriculture sector is the key to addressing poverty and food 
insecurity. To meet these challenges, Somali agriculture must be transformed from 
traditional production to modern commercial and competitive production.
=== PAGE 6 ===
2 
 
Some 3 million hectares are cultivable, almost 2.3 million hectares produces or could 
produce crops under rainfed conditions, and 700,000 hectares could produce crops under 
pump or recession-controlled irrigation, mainly along the two main rivers, the Shabelle 
and the Juba. It is important to highlight that almost two-thirds of cultivable lands, both 
rainfed and irrigated, is in the fertile areas along and between the two major rivers in the 
southern regions. A smaller cultivated area in the northwestern regions and some oasis 
and coastal cultivated areas in the northeastern regions constitute the remaining third. 
 
1.2 Background 
 
 
The Federal Republic of Somalia gives emphasis to develop the irrigation sub-sector to 
fully tap its potentials by assisting and supporting farmers to improve irrigation 
management practices and the promotion of modern irrigation systems. On this regard, 
the National Irrigation Policy (NIP) is the first edition of its kind developed in Somalia. The 
Federal Republic of Somalia found it is necessary to enact this policy due to the 
unregulated and mismanaged irrigation sector, traditional irrigation practices, and 
alarming water shortages in the Shabelle and Juba river basins. There is also a lack of 
coordination among various stakeholders, as well as a lack of advocacy and funding. 
 
The NIP is in line with the aspirations of Somalis as reflected in the National Development 
Plan (2017-2019), the National Agricultural Strategic Plan (2016-2020), as well as the 
regional and international strategies and initiatives, such as the Comprehensive African 
Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). 
 
The policy recognizes the provisions of the draft constitution and other by-laws of the 
country. Above all, the policy seeks to provide guidance to all stakeholders in the provision 
of irrigation goods, works, and services, as well as interventions that will facilitate 
improved food security, increased nutrition, and sustainable economic growth and 
development. 
 
The formulation and development of the National Irrigation Policy was based on the 
potential for the irrigation sector in contributing towards socio-economic growth through 
institutional capacity development. This will be done through strengthening the capacity
=== PAGE 7 ===
3 
 
of the National and State Irrigation departments, rehabilitation of existing irrigation 
infrastructures (canals, sluice gates, culverts, barrages and reservoirs), sustainable 
irrigation development and management as drawn in the National Agricultural Strategic 
Plan and the National Development Plan. 
 
1.3 History of Irrigation Context of Somalia 
 
 
Historically, the Juba and Shabelle rivers have been used for irrigation by small scale 
farmers in Southern Somalia. Large-scale commercial irrigation was introduced during 
the colonial era (1880-1960) and irrigated bananas and fruit trees (limes) were the major 
crops. Irrigation development and management started in 1920 with the implementation 
of the Jowhar Sugar Estate and construction of the irrigation barrages along the Shabelle 
and Juba river basins, which ushered in a new crop production system based on 
commercial farming for export. During the 1960s through the 1980s, this area was the 
breadbasket of the country, and given an enabling environment, could well reduce the 
food dependency for the country. Irrigation water is extracted either by barrages with weirs 
controlling water flow into primary canals, or by pumped intakes drawing water from the 
rivers into primary canals that commandeer water into secondary canals. 
 
The ten barrages on the Shabelle and Juba Rivers are probably the most significant forms 
of irrigation infrastructure in Somalia. They were constructed to increase the water depth 
in the river and divert the flow for irrigation purposes. The barrages were built of concrete 
with mechanical, metal gate structures that can be opened during flood conditions. Good 
topography permitted gravity irrigation through a network of canals. A total of nine 
barrages were built on the Shabelle River, and one on the Juba River. Irrigation 
development expanded gradually from the mid-1970s to 1990. Between 1980 and 1990, 
irrigated areas benefited from a well-established network of canals and drains, allowing a 
consistent supply of water that was supplemental due to scarce and unreliable rains. For 
many years, the fertile soils and climate had sustained good performance of both cash 
and food crops under irrigated conditions, while extra water was used for leaching 
practices that kept salinity build-up under control.
=== PAGE 8 ===
4 
 
 
Figure 1.1 Map of geographical location of barrages and irrigation schemes 
 
 
The Middle Shabelle region had some of the best irrigation and flood control infrastructure 
in the country. Gravity irrigation was frequently used; where it was not possible, pump 
irrigation was used. The Lower Shabelle region was one of the main producing areas for 
major export crops, such as bananas, grapefruits, and watermelons. Major infrastructure 
included seven barrages and various primary and secondary canals to facilitate gravity 
irrigation to large areas along the Shabelle River. On the other hand, the middle and lower 
reaches of the Juba River cut through rich alluvial soils, which made this region one of 
the most productive agricultural areas of the country. Pump irrigation was a common. The 
Fanoole dam and its associated infrastructure were the main gravity irrigation facilities in 
the Juba Valley. 
 
In contrast to the infrastructure in southern Somalia, irrigation infrastructure of Northern 
Somalia was very limited. The development of date palm plantations was a major 
intervention in North-East. It included improvements in associated irrigation infrastructure 
through small canals that provide water from shallow wells or water springs to small-scale
=== PAGE 9 ===
5 
 
farmers. Moreover, the development of soil banding, which was used mostly by sorghum 
farmers to conserve moisture and stop soil erosion, was among the few agriculture 
interventions in North-West. 
 
Before the war, the Somali Ministry of Agriculture estimated that 222,950 hectares were 
the total irrigated area for both land under controlled pump irrigation and land under flood- 
recession irrigation. At the time of the civil war in 1991 there were a total of nine 
functioning barrages along the Shabelle and one along the Juba. Somalia had large-scale 
flood control and irrigation schemes, consisting of barrages, canals, and other 
infrastructure in the middle and lower reaches of the Juba and Shabelle rivers. The area 
equipped for irrigation was 200,000ha in 1984, of which 50,000ha full/partial control 
surface irrigation and 150,000ha spate irrigation. However, much of the infrastructure has 
deteriorated causing agricultural productivity to be well below potential. Of the remaining 
infrastructures, many are not in use due to lack of maintenance and most of the formerly 
irrigated areas are now used for rainfed farming and grazing. 
 
1.4 Challenges of Irrigation Sector 
 
 
The following are the key identified irrigation challenges in Somalia: 
 
 
 Weak institutional capacity development at both the National and State level, 
including weakness and/or absence of irrigation systems, regulations, policy, and 
law enforcement. 
 
 Excessive and unregulated irrigation water usage following the traditional flood 
irrigation system that is a common practice in Somalia. This leads to a 
considerable loss of water and can result in dryness of the river. 
 
 There is continuous conflict between the farmers in the upper stream and lower 
stream areas of the rivers. This conflict is mainly due to a lack of water use 
management and regulations.
=== PAGE 10 ===
6 
 
 Most of the irrigation canals are so badly silted up and choked with vegetation that 
they can only operate when the river is at its highest, thus greatly reducing the 
irrigated area of crops. 
 
 Shortages of water also lead to conflicts when farmers block the canals and breach 
the banks for irrigation, thus depriving farmers further downstream of water. 
 
 Presently, only a small part of the high potential areas along the floodplains of Juba 
and Shabelle is utilized for agricultural production. Hence, there is a great potential 
for expansion and development. The policy intends to support the migration of 
farmers from subsistence farming to commercialization. 
 
 Traditional irrigation practices rather than modern irrigation technology in Somalia 
leads to using more water without consideration of crop water requirements. 
 
 Lack of river embankment programmes and river maintenance since 1991, which 
results in frequency of flood and recurrent droughts. 
 
 Silted up of primary and secondary canals in other irrigation networks. 
 
 Lack of fully functional barrages along the Shabelle and Juba River Basins. 
 
 Lack of irrigation committees at the National, State, and Community level. 
 
 Lack of river basin authorities in the Juba and Shabelle River Basins. 
 
 Lack of effective agriculture water resource management. 
 
 Poor coordination of irrigation programmes and sustainable irrigation management 
and development. 
 
 Poor water management in irrigation sector.
=== PAGE 11 ===
7 
 
 Water shortages and insecurity. 
 
 Poor shallow wells and dug/bored wells. 
 
 There are plenty of water that is lost during the rainy season. 
 
 It is crucial to carry out survey before digging the wells. This will help to recognize 
the availability of groundwater by using the meteorological data. 
 
 Poor water catchments particularly stream water. 
 
 Poor water management and poor storage systems in the irrigation sector. 
 
 Limited technology utilization such as the use of the solar energy to reduce the 
cost of the fuel. 
 
 Luck of maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures such as wells, dams and 
reservoirs. 
 
 Lack of effective investment in the irrigation sector. 
 
 Many shallow wells established along wadis were damaged by floods and 
abandoned. In order for local people with prior farming experience to restart 
farming, the rehabilitation of the existing shallow wells is one of the priorities, and 
its prompt implementation is required. 
 
 The irrigation system using shallow wells are the high fuel cost for pump operation 
and damage by floods. 
 
 The biggest constraint of irrigation systems using surface water is the instability of 
the water amount impounded in the pond or berkeds.
=== PAGE 12 ===
8 
 
 In order to reduce agricultural water use and manage water resources effectively 
and efficiently, it is crucial to adopt the improvement of the irrigation techniques 
and also to select the appropriate crops. 
 
 Lack of large-scale infrastructure, including dams, diversions for irrigation, and 
boreholes. 
 
 
 Poor of community-level infrastructure, including berkeds, shallow wells, ponds, 
and other technologies, ensuring that a mechanism for maintenance is in place. 
 
 Lack of embankments/gabions and check-dams to protect flood-prone areas. 
 
1.5 Opportunities of Irrigation sector in Somalia 
 
 
Agriculture is an important economic activity in Somalia not only in terms of meeting the 
food needs of the population but also in terms of generating income through crop sales 
and agricultural labour opportunities. With roughly 50% of population’s cereal 
requirements are met through domestic production. 
 
With an estimated 8.1 million hectares of fertile lands around the Shabelle and Juba rivers 
and surrounding regions, farming has the potential not only to cover domestic food 
demand, but also to play an important role in the export market. Moreover, millions of 
people depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. Most of these are small 
subsistence farmers working in rain-fed areas. Commercial small and medium-scale 
irrigated farms situated alongside the two main rivers (Shabelle and Juba) also play an 
essential role in fulfilling the food gaps as well as contributing to the national economy. 
These commercial farmers produce commercial crops such as banana, sesame, lemon, 
grapefruit, mango, papaya, and other vegetables and fruits intended for local as well as 
international markets. 
 
In dry lands, most of the irrigated agricultural farms are along the seasonal streams. Water 
is channeled directly from the springs and/or shallow wells constructed close to the 
streams in the valley bottoms. They also rely mostly on groundwater extraction, rainfall
=== PAGE 13 ===
9 
 
harvesting, and moisture retaining techniques. The recent drought affected very large 
parts of these areas. Local farmers in these states, had already practiced small-scale 
surface irrigation as well as oasis farming in dry riverbeds or adjacent areas, using water 
pumped from shallow wells and in some cases by tapping the sub-surface river flow 
directing it through channels into the fields. These farms produce mainly fruits and 
vegetables for neighbouring villages and urban centres. Since the farmlands are 
established in areas where irrigation water is available, most of the farmlands exist along 
wadis. The farms established by individual residents are usually small and have shallow 
wells as irrigation water sources. 
 
Shallow Groundwater is frequently pumped from shallow wells that are excavated in the 
beds or terraces of wadis at 5-7m depth. Seasonal changes of the water level and water 
volume are not large except in very severe series of drought. Constant use of the water 
for irrigation may be possible. Many shallow wells established along wadis were damaged 
by floods and abandoned. In order for local people with prior farming experience to restart 
farming, the rehabilitation of the existing shallow wells is one of the priorities, and its 
prompt implementation is required. 
 
1.6 Rationale for Irrigation Policy 
 
 
In Somalia, some 3 million hectares are cultivable, almost 2.3 million hectares produces 
or could produce crops under rainfed conditions, and 700,000 hectares could produce 
crops under pump or recession-controlled irrigation, mainly along the two main rivers, the 
Shabelle and the Juba. The water sources from both rivers offer employment, economic 
growth, and livelihoods for thousands of small scale and commercial farmers. Due to 
water shortages in the dry season, the rivers become a source of conflict between the 
farmers and the pastoralists who travel for miles in search of water for their livestock. 
 
Food insecurity is the most challenging of the problems facing the country. There are 
many causes, including the collapse of irrigation infrastructures such as main canals, 
barrages and reservoirs along the river basins. To further compound the problem of water 
availability, over 99% of Somalia’s total water withdrawal is used for irrigation purposes 
with river basins and groundwater resources currently over-burdened.
=== PAGE 14 ===
10 
 
2.0 THE NATIONAL IRRIGATION POLICY AND STRATEGY 
 
 
2.1 Policy Vision 
 
 
An irrigation sector that is sustainable, dynamic, efficient, demand driven, and acting as 
the transforming force in the development and diversification of agriculture, to create 
national wealth and food security. 
 
2.1 Policy Mission 
 
 
The National Irrigation Policy provides a comprehensive framework that will usher in 
economic growth in the agricultural sector through a functional and high performing 
national irrigation system. 
 
2.2 Goal and Objective of the Policy 
 
 
2.2.1 Goal of the Policy 
 
 
The overall goal of the National Irrigation Policy is to contribute to sustainable national 
economic growth and development through enhanced irrigated agricultural production 
and productivity. 
 
2.2.2 Objectives of the Policy 
 
 
The objective of this policy is sustainable best practice methods paired with attainable 
reforms that will lead Somalia to be economically successful. The objectives of the 
National Irrigation Policy will focus on: 
 
Strengthening and improving institutional and organizational capacity 
 
 
Developing and reforming irrigation practices throughout the country 
 
 
Gradual reforms that will establish national regulations and standards
=== PAGE 15 ===
11 
 
Promoting water use efficiency in communities through education and training, 
particularly women and those vulnerable to poverty 
 
Upgrades in the use of technologies that are cost-efficient and effective in reducing 
water use 
 
Access to information and participation in irrigation reforms for water-users 
 
 
Growth in opportunities for the private sector and communities within the irrigation 
sectors 
 
Promoting water use efficiency through strengthening the traditional water 
management systems 
 
Rehabilitation of irrigation hardware 
 
 
Water management plans during extreme weather events 
 
 
Development of seasonal rivers (waadi) that are used for irrigation purposes 
 
 
Development of groundwater resources for purposes of sustainable irrigation 
water 
 
2.3 Policy Outcomes 
 
 
The policy outcomes are: 
 
 
Strengthened institutional capacity of the irrigation sector in Somalia. 
 
 
Increased irrigated agricultural production and productivity. 
 
 
Improved agricultural water management through modern irrigation technology 
and efficiency of water use and management with regulations.
=== PAGE 16 ===
12 
 
Improved irrigation service delivery and increased employment opportunities. 
 
 
Improved water security of the Juba and Shabelle basins through irrigation 
development and management. 
 
Reduced conflicts and disputes that are related to irrigation sector 
 
 
Improved seasonal rivers (waadi) used for irrigation proposes 
 
Improved groundwater for purposes of sustainable irrigation water 
 
 
2.4 Policy Priorities and Target Areas 
 
 
In order to achieve the overall goal, the policy focuses on the following key four priority 
areas: 1. Institutional capacity development within the irrigation sector at both the National 
and State level, 2. Rehabilitation of existing irrigation infrastructure and development of 
new schemes, 3. Sustainable Irrigation Development and Management, and 4. Irrigation 
Research and Information Management. 
 
2.4.1 Institutional Capacity Development 
 
 
The development and management of irrigation schemes require adequate technical, 
administrative, and financial capacity, among others. The technical competence within 
the public and private sectors including training institutions and beneficiary communities 
is critical for sustainable irrigation development and management. 
 
The main institutional capacity challenges include 
a lack of an irrigation master plan, irrigation law, irrigation strategic plan 
 
 
undocumented irrigation materials and training needs for irrigation stakeholders 
 
 
unavailability of national irrigation standards, code of practice and guidelines for 
irrigation development,
=== PAGE 17 ===
13 
 
inadequate availability of irrigation expertise 
 
 
lack of irrigation research center/institute and extension services, 
 
 
lack of heavy machineries for irrigation and river embankment, 
 
 
  Inadequate irrigation service providers. 
 
 
Organized governance is needed for the development and growth of the irrigation sector. 
The Federal government must strengthen capacity building and fill in the missing gaps in 
the services provided by the private sector, community workers, donors, and others. The 
capacity of all relevant parties must be further developed by initiatives between the 
federal, regional, and local governments in partnership with water users. 
 
2.4.1.1 Policy Strategic Objective 
 
 
To develop systematic trainings, improve the technical competence within the public and 
private sectors, including training institutions and beneficiary communities, and get heavy 
machinery supply for irrigation and river embankments. 
 
2.4.1.2 Policy Statements 
 
 
The policy will therefore: 
 
 
Develop and implement an irrigation master plan through community engagement 
and needs. 
 
Develop and improve training programmes (including on job training) to address 
capacity gaps in the public and private institutions, including training institutions. 
 
Develop irrigation standards, code of practice and irrigation development 
guidelines, and ensure that these are adhered to by all irrigation stakeholders.
=== PAGE 18 ===
14 
 
Ensure that there is a greater presence of irrigation experts at the National, State, 
district, and village level. 
 
Develop and adapt irrigation technologies and best practices, taking into account 
the financial and technical beneficiary limitations, and disseminate through a 
robust extension system. 
 
Encourage irrigation stakeholders to acquire the necessary equipment and 
irrigation technologies. 
 
Encourage registration of irrigation service providers (i.e. consultants and 
contractors) with relevant professional bodies. 
 
Facilitate farmer training programmes so as to transform the mind-set of farmers 
from using traditional irrigation practices to using modern irrigation technology, and 
from subsistence to commercial irrigation. 
 
Establish a National Irrigation Board that will usher in a PPP with the inclusion of 
all water users. 
 
Develop and improve upon existing training programmes with an emphasis on 
targeting the public and private sectors. 
 
Expand technical abilities of government staff in the planning, design, monitoring, 
and evaluation of all areas of the irrigation sector. 
 
Provide easy access to the planned national database on water use in the irrigation 
sector. 
 
Create a standardized national code of practice and guidelines in order to sustain 
irrigation reforms. 
 
Encourage a working relationship between irrigation experts and farmers with an 
emphasis on the dissemination of crucial information such as sustainable methods.
=== PAGE 19 ===
15 
 
Expand and reinforce the role of government institutions in the development and 
growth of the irrigation sector. 
 
Establish water user associations in all communities with particular attention to 
small-scale farmers. 
 
Coordinate a dialogue between associations, particularly the groups that are 
upstream and downstream of one other, as well as agriculturalists and pastoralists. 
 
Involve all stakeholders, including user group representatives, in policy reform 
discussions and decisions with government representatives. 
 
2.4.2 Rehabilitation of Existing Irrigation Infrastructure and development of new 
schemes 
 
Since the collapse of the central government of Somalia, almost over half of the irrigation 
infrastructures are not functional due to the collapse of irrigation systems, including 
canals, barrages, culverts, and sluice gates. Most of the irrigation canals are so badly 
silted up and choked with vegetation that they only operate when the river is at its highest, 
greatly reducing the irrigated area of crops. Another result of the non-functioning canal 
system is the breaching of riverbanks by farmers to obtain irrigation water, which is 
resulting in uncontrolled flooding and wastage of water. Crops irrigated in this way are 
unlikely to get a second irrigation water application. Shortage of water also leads to 
conflict when farmers block the canals and breach the banks for irrigation, thus depriving 
farmers further downstream of water. Rehabilitation and maintenance of canals, diversion 
structures and off-takes are very necessary and critical. 
 
Somalia’s irrigation infrastructure is in need of comprehensive rehabilitation. Prior to the 
Civil war, it was estimated that the irrigation potential was approximately 240,000 ha. 
However, only 65,000 ha of agricultural land is currently under cultivation.
=== PAGE 20 ===
16 
 
2.4.2.1 Policy Strategic Objectives 
 
 
To rehabilitate existing irrigation infrastructures/schemes, including canals, barrages, 
sluice gates, and reservoirs, to increase agricultural production and productivity and 
reduce the recurrent drought and flood in Somalia. 
 
The Policy Statement: 
 
 
i. 
Identify and update rehabilitation requirements for all major irrigation schemes 
using a standardized system of data collection. 
 
i. 
Restore structures in stages with focus first on the most problematic areas. 
 
 
ii. 
Engage water users and the respective organizations in the rehabilitation 
efforts and provide training for infrastructure operation and maintenance. 
 
iv. Educate water user organizations on the consequences of negative 
environmental conditions on irrigation structures. 
 
v. Rehabilitate priorities of irrigation infrastructure such as canals, sluice gates, 
barrages, and reservoirs to restore the physical status and functioning of canals 
to develop and expand overall irrigation infrastructure and to increase the yield 
of the crops for both subsistence and commercial purpose. 
 
vi. Support and encourage the mobilization of financial resources for the 
rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructures and facilitate the establishment and 
operationalization of the Irrigation fund to finance irrigation projects. 
 
vii.  Promote the effective management and system utilization of water resources 
for agriculture. 
 
vii. Support and encourage the application of environmental and social impact 
assessments for the rehabilitation of the irrigation infrastructure.
=== PAGE 21 ===
17 
 
xi. Support and encourage the private sector, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) 
and beneficiary community participation in the irrigation sector. 
 
2.4.3 Sustainable Irrigation Development 
 
 
Sustainable irrigation development entails construction of new infrastructure to put more 
land under irrigation. The irrigated area has been reducing steadily since the collapse of 
Somali central government in 1991. 
 
The development of irrigation has been less than the desired level due to a number of 
factors, including a lack of financial resource mobilization, un-harmonized irrigation 
development activities, environmental and land degradation, and limited participation of 
stakeholders. 
 
Currently, the irrigation water use efficiency is low compared to prewar in Somalia. Flood 
irrigation, the traditional method used to cultivate crops, has resulted in minimum 
productivity and loss of crops. 
 
2.4.3.1 Policy Strategic Objective 
 
 
To develop more irrigation infrastructures and put more land under irrigation in order to 
achieve sustainable development of irrigation infrastructure and create a financial 
resource mobilization unit. 
 
2.4.3.2 The Policy Statement: 
 
 
i. 
Introduce and test low-impact, simple systems, such as drip irrigation, in 
randomized sectors. 
 
i. 
Promote conjunctive use of groundwater, rainwater, and treated wastewater 
through educational workshops. 
ii. 
Research the applicability and effectiveness of water storage systems, such as 
artificial swales and wet season run-off.
=== PAGE 22 ===
18 
 
iv. Use demonstration plots when necessary to introduce water users to efficient 
technologies and methods. 
v. Support and encourage the mobilization of financial resources for irriga-tion 
development and management. 
 
vi. Facilitate the establishment of the Somali National Irrigation Committee and that 
will advise government and stakeholders on policy matters relating to irrigation and 
drainage. 
 
vii. Facilitate the establishment and operationalization of the Irrigation Fund to finance 
irrigation development projects. 
 
vii. Support the implementation of the Irrigation action plans mentioned in the National 
Development Plan and the National Agricultural Strategic Plan. 
 
ix. Support and encourage the application of environmental and social impact 
assessments and implementation of environmental management plans. 
x. Support and encourage the private sector, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), and 
beneficiary community participation in irrigation development through provision of 
irrigation development support and extension services in aspects such as 
feasibility studies, design, and construction. 
 
xi. Facilitate development of water resources for sustaining water availability 
throughout the irrigation season.
=== PAGE 23 ===
19 
 
2.4.4 Sustainable Irrigation Management 
 
 
The management of irrigation projects is affected by a number of challenges that include 
the lack of Shabelle and Juba River Basin irrigation system maintenance, which impacting 
the availability of water resources, beneficiary community unwillingness or capacity 
limitations to operate and maintain the systems, irrigation challenges, land tenure issues, 
and lack of irrigation extension services, which cause loss of systems capacity. 
 
The developed areas of irrigated schemes should be well managed to sustain 
productivity. The beneficiary community should operate and maintain the infrastructure 
so that the designed capacities are maintained to support desired crop production levels. 
 
2.4.4.1 Policy Strategic Objective 
 
 
To develop sustainable irrigation management that can prevent degradation of the land 
and environment through river basin management, which will increase the availability of 
water resources. To maintain the infrastructure by the beneficiary community so that the 
designed capacities are maintained to support desired crop production levels and 
strengthen irrigation extension services. 
 
2.4.4.2 Policy Statements 
 
 
The policy will therefore: 
 
 
i) 
Encourage the establishment of River Basin Authority and promotion of 
watershed management practices for the benefit of irrigating and non-irrigating 
communities. 
 
ii) 
Empower farmer organizations through technical and administrative knowledge 
to ensure effective community participation. 
 
iii) 
Establish irrigation committees at the village level and a water user association 
for effective water use and management.
=== PAGE 24 ===
20 
 
iv) 
Explore alternatives to the handling and marketing of farmers’ produce for 
maximum profitability of irrigated crops. 
 
v) 
Strengthen extension services for irrigated agriculture through awareness and 
outreach of irrigation technologies. 
 
vi) 
Support beneficiary communities where major rehabilitation is needed through 
upgrades or the modernization of irrigation infrastructure. 
 
2.4.5 Irrigation Research and Information Management 
 
 
Despite the well-elaborated importance of irrigated agriculture for crop production, 
productivity, and profitability, appropriate interventions including research are not yet 
being pursued in those areas. There is no comprehensive research in the irrigation sector 
to ensure proper planning, design, development, management, operation, and 
maintenance of irrigation schemes. Consequently, there are few appropriate 
recommendations that integrate water and other resources relevant to irrigated 
agriculture. 
 
Due to a shortage of irrigation research scientists, inadequate funding, and a lack of 
appropriate irrigation research facilities and equipment, research activities undertaken by 
institutions in the country do not adequately address irrigation issues. Research activities 
undertaken before the collapse of the central government in 1991 cannot provide required 
technological support for improvement of productivity and profitability. 
 
With the help of international agencies and institutions, pertinent data and information 
related to irrigation statistics for Somalia is variable. 
 
Creating an irrigation information management system is crucial in Somalia. The aim of 
the work is to set up a comprehensive countrywide Information System for Irrigation. The 
system combines the existing and available information on Somalia, focusing its attention 
on the two river plains that are the most significant agricultural areas. In spite of the lack 
of some detailed data, the present Information Irrigation System can be considered a first 
effort to build up a useful tool to control, plan, manage, and monitor the land. In this
=== PAGE 25 ===
21 
 
prospect, the main tasks of the work will be collecting all the existing and available 
information of Somalia and critically evaluate the usefulness of this information in the 
context of the future system. 
 
2.4.5.1 Policy Strategic Objective 
 
 
To introduce and strengthen research and information on irrigation development and 
management, whose findings will contribute towards the attainment of optimal irrigation 
efficiency, provision of information on new and appropriate technologies for irrigation 
practices that lead to more crop production, and sustainable productivity in irrigated 
agriculture. 
 
2.4.5.2 Policy Statements 
 
 
In order to achieve the above objective, the following will be undertaken: 
 
 
i) 
The establishment of an irrigation information management system. 
 
 
ii) 
Launch a program with the support of the federal government where state 
members compile collected data on water use, extreme weather event 
patterns, and irrigation efficiency into a national database. 
 
iii) 
Provide continued training for relevant staff at data centers to improve irrigation 
water management analysis. 
 
iv) 
Work in conjunction with relevant agencies and institutions to promote data 
collection of newly introduced practices and cost-efficient technologies. 
 
v) 
Educate farmers on observed patterns of water use in regional irrigation 
schemes. 
 
vi) 
Ensure that research in irrigation is initiated and sustained with a focus on 
enhanced performance of irrigation interventions.
=== PAGE 26 ===
22 
 
vii) 
Support and coordinate irrigation research for irrigation development, with the 
aim of improving land and water productivity in a sustainable manner. 
 
viii) 
Ensure that irrigation research findings are properly documented for the 
purpose of utilizing the already compiled technical information. 
 
ix) 
Promote and institutionalize a mechanism for the coordination and 
dissemination of irrigation research findings. 
 
x) 
Initiate and strengthen irrigation research in collaboration with relevant 
stakeholders, which includes local and international research institutions.
=== PAGE 27 ===
23 
 
3. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT FOR POLICY IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
3.1 Roles and Responsibilities at Different Levels 
 
 
3.1.1 National Level 
 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation is responsible for the implementation and 
coordination of the National Irrigation Policy. The National Ministry works in close 
collaboration with the State Ministries of Agriculture and Irrigation and in partnership with 
pertinent stakeholders. Stakeholders include donors, implementing agencies, the private 
sector, academic and research institutions, and civil society organizations. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation has the lead mandate for the implementation of 
the National Irrigation Policy. The Ministry will determine policy orientation and 
development, and from time to time, review the policy and legislation, and prepare a 
conducive environment for sectoral coordination and integration. It will take into account 
the availability of different legal and regulatory frameworks and standards, which depend 
on legislation, regulations, and procedures for irrigation development. This policy 
recognizes different sectoral policies, as they are important in achieving its objectives. 
 
The implementation of this policy will be harmonized with other sectoral policies and 
coordinated with the work of different stakeholders interested in the development of the 
irrigation sector. The Ministry will provide technical services to the state level Ministries. 
 
The Ministry will undertake awareness raising and advisory services to Federal Member 
State (FMS), irrigation committees, water user associations (WUA), and the private sector 
on all aspects of irrigation development, research, and capacity building. It will also 
provide technical backstopping on studies and detailed designs of irrigation infrastructure, 
preparation and processing of tender documents for irrigation schemes, construction and 
supervision of irrigation infrastructure, service provision to the users of irrigation 
investments, and advisory services to private sector in irrigated agriculture. The Federal 
Ministry will, in collaboration with the relevant Federal Member States’ Ministries, promote 
Integrated Water Resources Management in the Basins.
=== PAGE 28 ===
24 
 
The Ministry will be at the center of irrigated agriculture development. As such, the 
Ministry will be responsible for ensuring close coordination amongst various 
Ministries/agencies such as: the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, the Ministry of 
Livestock, Range, and Forestay, the Ministry of Fishery and Marine Resources, the 
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, the Ministry of Interior, the 
Ministry of Planning, Investment Promotion, and Economic Development, and the Ministry 
of Public Works and Reconstruction, among others. 
 
To ensure the success of reforms, particularly those that encourage technologies and 
methods not traditionally used by farmers, it is imperative that policies be implemented 
systematically. Strategies should be supported by evidence and research as this will 
induce water users. Furthermore, deploying a phase system that targets changes by the 
ranking of the most critical problems will allow for the gradual introduction and 
implementation of policy reforms. 
 
Any and all development of irrigation reforms will be undertaken in conjunction with water 
user organizations and representatives from the private sector. The development, 
rehabilitation, and execution of schemes and technologies will include the full participation 
of farmers dependent on irrigation. 
 
The procedural and evaluation strategies for the policy focus areas will be undertaken 
with support from water user organizations, donors, and all relevant institutions, agencies, 
and private sector partners. The main areas for coordination will include: 
 
Survey and assessment of irrigation sector 
 
 
Promotion and planning of irrigation development and management in 
potential areas 
 
Promotion of irrigation technologies 
 
 
Promotion of integrated water resources management
=== PAGE 29 ===
25 
 
Capacity development for the irrigation professionals and experts 
Irrigation research, extension, and studies 
 
Sensitization and beneficiary mobilization 
 
 
Irrigation water management practices 
 
 
3.1.2 State Level 
 
 
State governments will play an increasingly important role in the implementation of the 
National Irrigation Policy. The State governments have been given the responsibilities of 
developing and implementing irrigation development interventions by outsourcing 
expertise from the public and private sector. The FMS have the major role of assisting 
farmers in the overall process of the identification, implementation, and management of 
irrigation schemes. 
 
The FMS will be responsible for the preparation and enforcement of irrigation by-laws and 
the establishment and maintenance of database for irrigation development. Furthermore, 
the FMS will be responsible for training staff and irrigators on issues related to irrigation 
development at the district and village level. 
 
3.1.3 Private Sector 
 
 
Private sectors could play a crucial role in irrigation development and management in 
Somalia. Since the collapse of the central government of Somalia in 1991, the country 
changed from public to full private sector involvement in different sectors including 
irrigation agriculture therefore this policy gives consideration for the involvement and 
participation of irrigation management and development.
=== PAGE 30 ===
26 
 
3.1.3.1 Consultants and Contractors 
 
 
a. The capacity in planning, designing, and implementing irrigation projects in the 
private sector will be improved through contractual services. 
 
b. The private sector will become more involved in irrigation activities that include 
carrying out studies, surveys, design, and construction work. 
 
c. Consultants (both national and international) will be engaged with clear Terms of 
Reference (ToRs). No foreign consultant shall work in the irrigation sector without 
partnering with national consultants who are registered with the National and State 
Ministries. In addition, at least 30% of key personnel shall be Somali nationals. 
 
d. After detailed designs and engineering works are completed, contractors 
registered with National and State Ministries will work together to complete 
projects. This will combine their funds and implementation timeframes. Foreign 
contractors will be encouraged to form joint ventures with local contractors. 
 
3.1.3.2 Equipment and Spare Parts Suppliers 
 
 
a. The private sector and CSOs will be encouraged to increase stocks of new 
irrigation equipment, spare parts of acceptable standards, and provide training to 
farmers and communities who purchase equipment if necessary. 
 
b. Pricing mechanism of equipment, spare parts, and services will ensure affordability 
by the smallholder farmers. 
 
3.1.3.3 Credit and Banking Institutions 
 
 
a) Credit institutions will be encouraged to respond to the needs of small-scale 
irrigation beneficiaries by providing affordable credit facilities for agricultural inputs 
acquisition through their legal community organizations.
=== PAGE 31 ===
27 
 
b) Banking institutions will be encouraged to recognize the local community 
organizations for purposes of providing credit for capital development using terms 
that are affordable to the small-scale irrigation farmers. 
 
3.1.3.4 Commercial and Large-Scale Farmers 
 
 
a. The commercial and large-scale farmers will be encouraged to share their 
experience in irrigated agriculture for the benefit of the smallholder farming 
communities. 
 
b. Contract farming will be one of the alternatives to absorb the extra labour and also 
provide estates with alternative land management. 
 
c. Large-scale farmers will take on the added responsibility of acting as centers 
where the surrounding community can access farm inputs, provide storage and/or 
processing facilities of farm produce, and as marketing outlets of farm produce. 
 
d. Large-scale farmers will be encouraged to invest more in irrigated agriculture. 
 
 
3.1.3.4 Civil Society 
 
 
Efforts will be made to promote CSOs-development partner collaboration. The private 
sector and CSOs will also be encouraged to provide services, equipment, and materials 
for development of irrigated agriculture. Their involvement will encompass community 
level support including: 
 
Capacity building 
 
 
Demonstration of irrigated agriculture 
 
 
Implementation of small-scale irrigation projects 
 
 
Networking for the transfer of irrigation technology
=== PAGE 32 ===
28 
 
Promotion and management of labour saving technologies 
 
 
Assistance to the Ministry responsible for agriculture and irrigation 
development in the distribution of agricultural inputs 
 
A platform for dialogue with CSOs will be established and an enabling environment will 
be created for these dialogues to operate effectively through involvement in irrigated 
agriculture programmes. In addition, cooperation shall be established with CSOs to avoid 
duplication of efforts and to encourage them to participate in the implementation of the 
national program for irrigation development. 
 
3.1.3.5 Agriculture Cooperative Union 
 
 
The National Agriculture Cooperative involved in irrigation will be required to participate 
in the sector of planning and review of the irrigation sub sector for effective information 
sharing. 
 
3.1.3.6 Development and Implementing Partners 
 
 
Non-Governmental Organizations are encouraged to support the pilot programmes and 
will encourage greater support to Agriculture Cooperatives through government and 
donor funding. All cooperatives embarking on the development of irrigation projects shall 
have to pass their plans through the Department of Irrigation to ensure adherence to 
standards and specifications. In addition, their work will be subject to monitoring and 
evaluation by DoI. Implementing partner expectations are as follows: 
 
a. The support from development partners for development of irrigation will be 
directed by the policies and strategies outlined in this policy. 
 
b. The Federal Government of Somalia will indicate areas of priority for funding to 
development partners. At the same time, they will outline their areas of interest in 
order to harmonize national needs with preferred areas of support.
=== PAGE 33 ===
29 
 
c. Development partners will have to coordinate, among themselves, support 
rendered to the irrigation sector, and to this effect, there is a need for a coordinator 
from FGS for irrigation funding. 
 
d. An Irrigation Fund (IF) will be set up for effective investment in irrigation 
development with contributions from FGS and development partners. 
 
e. FGS will be responsible for managing the fund by directing irrigation investment 
programmes.
=== PAGE 34 ===
30 
 
4. COORDINATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
 
 
4.1 Coordination Process 
 
 
It is important that all actors of this policy are coordinated throughout implementation. The 
Ministry responsible for the development of irrigation is responsible for coordinating all 
stakeholders of this policy. The agricultural and irrigation sector Lead Ministries at the 
Federal and State level have an important role to play in ensuring a holistic approach in 
the implementation of the policy. Proper coordination on the implementation will lead to 
awareness of stakeholders to accrue a number of benefits, which include integral and 
optimal utilization of the efforts and resources from all players. This will avoid duplication 
of efforts amongst the stakeholders, conflicts on the use of resources and interventions, 
and ensure a holistic approach to land and water resource development and integrated 
water resource management. 
 
4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation will be responsible for monitoring and evaluation 
by overseeing a quarterly report of policy reform implementations shared with all relevant 
stakeholders. Institutions, agencies, and water user organizations will be responsible for 
sharing results with regional representatives appointed by the Ministry. 
 
Following each report, a review will be conducted by relevant appointees within the 
irrigation sector in order to advise on necessary solutions and to implement the next 
phase of a policy focus area. 
 
The policy shall be reviewed and revised as necessary on an annual basis for the first 
five years. If significant improvements, stagnations, or failures occur in a focus area, 
modifications may be made following the recommendation of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Irrigation. 
 
The implementation of the policy will be monitored through a monitoring and evaluation 
system with a necessary feedback mechanism so as to effectively track sector
=== PAGE 35 ===
31 
 
performance indicators. Joint Sector Review meetings will be used for information sharing 
and effective engagement of stakeholders in irrigation development. 
 
The Ministry responsible for irrigation will coordinate and lead the monitoring and 
evaluation process of the policy and ensure timely reporting and dissemination of results. 
An Irrigation Monitoring and Evaluation Systems Report will be prepared annually. All 
agencies implementing programmes relating to this policy will report periodically to their 
respective coordinating bodies. The Monitoring and Evaluation Systems results will be 
used to inform all irrigation stakeholders to influence programme planning and design 
processes, as well as resource management. 
 
This Policy will be reviewed based on a five-year cycle as established in the policy 
formulation process. However, this policy, or parts of it, may be amended if there are 
significant changes in the operating environment during the course of its implementation. 
The Ministry responsible for irrigation will review the policy. 
 
4.3 Cross-Cutting Issues 
 
 
Proper management of water resources used in the irrigation sector is critical in light of 
embedded factors that exacerbate problems related to access. For rural communities that 
have limited resources to begin with, cross-cutting issues must be taken into account 
when implementing and evaluating policy reforms. The issues identified are: 
 
i. 
Extreme Weather Events 
 
 
ii. 
Health 
 
 
iii. 
Conflict and Security 
 
 
iv. 
Illiteracy
