=== PAGE 1 ===
 
1 
 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
 
 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
 
FOR 
 
SELECTION OF CONSULTANCY SERVICE TO CARRYOUT A FEASIBILITY STUDY 
ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A UNIFIED NATIONAL DIGITAL EXPORT AND 
ANIMAL HEALTH CERTIFICATE GENERATING SYSTEM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2024
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
2 
1. Background  
The Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range (MoLFR) of the Federal Republic of Somalia 
is responsible for improving livestock health conditions, access to high-quality fodder, suitable 
markets, and sustainable production. The ministry safeguards rangeland resources and forestry 
from land degradation and deforestation to ensure sustainable production of pasture for 
livestock and benefiting other natural resources on rangeland and forestry sustainably. The 
ministry further enhances human resource capacity building and institutional strengthening, 
animal health and disease control, animal production, rangeland development, and livestock 
marketing and trade facilitation. 
 
Somalia has traditionally hinged on livestock production for a greater part of its GDP output. 
Most of this economic contribution to the GDP from livestock production is earned from export 
of livestock and livestock products to markets outside of Somalia including cross border trade 
and intense domestic consumption. Yet, given this significance, the sector has been facing 
significant challenges when it comes to an efficient certification process for both its export 
trade, domestic and cross border business engagements, due to the sector’s currently heavily 
reliance on an old practice of certificate provision for its veterinary services and animal export 
certificates. The practice is majorly dependent on a paperwork-based certificate issuance, 
whose security vulnerability is a significant livestock trade barrier, given the multi-stakeholder 
involvement of the issuance process at various export points of the country. The Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry and Range leveraging the support its development partner, the World Bank 
Group, through the DRIVE Project, seeks to address this multi-handed certification service 
currently in practice by assessing the development of a unified national digital export and 
animal health certification system and determining the best, suitable and state of the art 
certification system through this consultancy service. The consultancy will conduct a feasibility 
study on the development of the system and its operationalization by the ministry and define 
specifications, administrative, technological, and operationalization technical requirement of 
the certificate generating system.  
 
With a regional coverage (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia), the De-Risking, Inclusion 
and Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies (DRIVE) project’ s development objective is 
to enhance de-risking, market inclusion, and value addition of pastoral economies in the Horn 
of Africa. DRIVE aims to protect pastoralists against drought shocks, using a package of 
financial services including drought insurance, savings facilitation, provision of credit funding, 
and to connect the pastoralists better to markets by upgrading the livestock value chains and 
facilitating the regional livestock trade. One of the initiatives of DRIVE is to support the 
Ministry of Livestock, Forestry, and Range, Federal Government of Somalia, to procure a 
modern and unified digital export and animal health certificate generation system. This 
initiative will upgrade Somalia's veterinary certification system, ensuring greater reliability, 
efficiency, and fostering significant technological advancement in livestock services. The goal 
is to facilitate livestock trade and establish uniform livestock export health certificate 
generation system within the country.   
 
2. Significance and Rationale  
The unified national digital export and animal health certificates system, that the Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry, and Range currently is considering, will be a standardized and centralized 
online digital system where livestock transporters and exporters apply for with a system secure 
bar code for authenticity and receive animal health and livestock export certificates 
electronically.
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
3 
 
In the context of the DRIVE project in Somalia together with its anticipated project results, 
establishing unified national digital export and animal health certificates system for the 
livestock sector will significantly help to improve the efficiency and accuracy of the export 
certification and enhance the delivery of public veterinary service of the Ministry. Through 
such a system, livestock exporters as well as the animal resource community will enjoy the 
advantage of an efficient, agile and reliable single window veterinary and export certification 
service, enabling them to lodge standardized information and documents with a central and 
single-entry point at the Ministry- fulfilling all health, export, administrative and transit-related 
requirements for the certification before organizing an action of export.  
 
Somalia is not only rich with terrestrial animal resource, but it also has plenty of aquatic animal 
resource potential for export, domestic and regional trade. The unified export certification 
system will also support the aquatic animal food export and trade through enhanced and 
centralized digital veterinary certification by the respective veterinary offices at the Ministry 
of Livestock, Forestry and Range. 
 
While there may be no off the shelf digital system solution that offer such services, many 
countries have implemented bespoke solutions that are deeply integrated with internal practices 
but also interoperable with external systems through a custom set of application programming 
interfaces (API).The system that the Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range is seeking will 
be expected to offer a lot of benefits including improved regulatory compliance, streamlining 
issuance of competent export and animal health certificates, reducing turnaround times and 
increasing trade efficiency, reducing bureaucracy and paperwork, errors and inconsistences 
usually associated with a rather cumbersome manual processes, providing greater transparency 
in the export and animal health certification process, building trust and confidence between 
stakeholders, including the Ministry, exporters, country livestock and livestock product 
importer partners, and consumers on the basis of health and safety of animals as well as 
increasing the competitiveness of the livestock sector abroad. 
 
 
3. The Objective of Assignment  
The objective of the assignment is to carry out a feasibility study for the design, development 
and operationalization of a unified national digital export and animal health certificates system 
for the Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range. Specifically, the feasibility study will cover:  
 
1. Assessing the current state of export and animal health certification service in practice 
at different points (Federal and FMS) and conducting a feasibility study on the 
establishment of unified national digital export and animal health certification service 
in Somalia’s livestock sector. 
2. Identifying the potential benefits and challenges associated with developing such a 
system, particularly revenue generation aspects and, recommending the appropriate 
system to serve the heath and quality requirements of Somalia’s livestock and livestock 
products export in terms of certification. 
3. Evaluating the technical feasibility of developing such a system, assessing the financial 
feasibility of developing such a system; engaging with stakeholders such as government 
agencies, animal health bodies of the Ministry and States, trade and agri-business 
associations, exporters, importers, and other relevant stakeholders throughout the
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
4 
assignment processes to ensure that the system will meet their needs now and in the 
future. 
4. Developing the technical specifications, software and hardware requirements, general 
technical compliance requirements, and installation and operationalization of the 
proposed/studied national digital export and animal health certificate generating 
system. The firm will prepare the full set of technical specification and 
operationalization documents to be utilized in the procurement process of the good. 
 
4. Scope of the Assignment 
To deliver the feasibility study that enables as well as providing essential information for the 
Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range and other stakeholders to make informed decisions 
about the development of a unified national digital export and animal health certificates system, 
the consulting firm will perform the following activities: 
 
i) 
Review the policy, legal, regulatory and market systems’ requirements for export 
and animal health certificates and, determine how the chosen digital system for 
procurement could comply with the international requirements at the livestock 
markets that not only includes the Arabian Peninsula markets but also other 
potential markets for animal sourced food from Somalia including the EU, Asia, 
and the USA. This also includes reviewing the laws of the Federal Republic of 
Somalia, documenting any gaps for action by relevant parties.  
  
ii) 
Review the global trends and the digital solutions available in other jurisdictions for 
export and animal health certification, in line with the published standards and 
procedures at OIE, WTO, Codex, etc. and ISO. Of importance would be 
jurisdictions/benchmarks where unified national digital export and animal health 
certificates systems have promoted international trade for livestock and livestock 
products, simplified export processes, enhanced efficiency, traceability and 
augmented transparency, ensured consistent animal health and regulatory 
compliance, reduced administrative costs, and supported data-driven decision-
making. 
 
iii) 
Assess how the proposed Animal Health (e-AH) Certificate to be exchanged 
between the AMS must be aligned to the Electronic Certificate (e-Cert), an 
international standard developed and maintained by the United Nations Centre for 
Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT). Further, animal health 
requirements must also be aligned to standards published by the World Organisation 
for Animal Health (OIE), notably the “Terrestrial Animal Health Code” and the 
“Aquatic Animal Health Code. 
 
iv) 
Review and analyse the Somalia SPS and trade regulatory and legal frameworks 
and associated legal documents, including trade and SPS related laws, rules, 
regulations and other requirements for the imports, exports, and international trade 
of animal and animal products, and food products for compliance with SPS and 
other trade requirements and that of main trading partners.  
v) 
Provide justified recommendation to make changes in the relevant legal documents 
that would enable Somalia to meet the import and export requirements for animal 
and animal products, and food products.
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
5 
vi) 
Develop and simplify the guidelines and/or standard operational procedures (SOP) 
for market access and obtaining SPS certificates ensuring the SPS compliance 
requirement of Gulf countries and main trading livestock partners. The SOP should 
cover detailed steps for both private sector, who are exporters and producers, and 
authorities, who issue the certificates. The SOP should be developed in consultation 
with both private sector and public agencies concerned, as well as in coordination 
with neighbouring countries. This includes consultation workshops to finalize the 
SOP.  
 
vii) 
Assess e-certification for export of animal and animal products: Review the existing 
processes of animal tracking and issuance of sanitary certificates including animal 
health certificate, vaccination certificate, biosecurity certificate of animal farm, 
animal product safety certificate for imports, exports and transit and advise to 
develop online systems for issues of these sanitary certificates.  
a) Review strategy/ies drafted by other project(s) for targeting the informal 
animal trade in Somalia based on an assessment of the sources of the trade, 
the likely border and other transit points for such trade and the most effective 
and efficient means of intercepting such traffic. 
b) Review the e-veterinary certification systems for international trade on the 
basis of a single window system under the WTO Standards Trade 
Development Facility (STDF) being developed by the World Organization 
of Animal Health (OIE)  https://www.woah.org/en/home/ (previously 
oie.int).  
c) Identify the basic features for operating systems, including technical details, 
the drivers for introducing e-certification (e.g. economic development, trade 
facilitation, enhancing regulatory controls), and challenges in overcoming 
the hurdles preventing widespread use). 
d) Provide recommendations on development of the system for the gathering 
information on animal and animal product import and export and initiate a 
framework to facilitate e-veterinary certification development and potential 
link with the international trade on the basis of a single window system 
based on the WTO Standards Trade Development Facility (STDF). 
e) Review the prerequisites for the hub. The structure and transmission of eCVI 
should be harmonized globally, allows equal participation to countries 
without national system, animal health authorities do not need to set up 
bilateral systems to connect with each other and should be link with other 
international E-Systems (e.g., single window). 
f) Conduct a business process evaluation and determine the steps required to 
implement e-certificate system, including contacting -or/and contracting- 
WOAH (and WTO) on the progress and conditions for an international e-
CVI system to be operational.  
g) Assist the DLF in relating with Vet Sentry e-CVIs (vet-sentry.com/eCVI) to 
seek assistance or explanations on their system. 
 
viii) 
Asses the current system of manual (or other) export and animal health certification 
apparatus in Somalia. Analytical work could focus but not be limited to: 
a. The digital technology gaps, needs and concerns of key stakeholders 
relevant to the MoLFR, encompassing trade and producer agencies, 
government, industry associations, and international partners, to gauge their
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
6 
appreciation, potential and preparedness (literacy levels, level of use of 
digital skills, etc.) for eventual beneficiation of such a system.  
b. The current infrastructure and the current processes and procedures for 
issuing export and animal health certificates in the country. Where many 
apparatuses exist, the consulting firm should investigate the possible 
migratory, efficacy and interoperability of such systems with a view to the 
new hardware and software and unification initiative, including associated 
processes and costs.  
c. The data security risks associated with the current unified system in use. 
ix) 
Evaluate the technical feasibility of owning independently the system, or a hosting 
choice (if there is no option of independent system ownership) and maintaining the 
unified digital export and animal health certificates system within Somalia, in terms 
of requisite technical personnel, technical infrastructure and cyber security support 
needed to operate and maintain such a system. 
• Conduct technical and legal mapping and coordinate with relevant 
stakeholders on the Single Window and the readiness to exchange e-
SPS; • 
• Present the proposed electronic SPS information flow and e-SPS data 
structure  
• Develop the Electronic Operational Certification Procedure for e-SPS; • 
Develop the e-SPS message implementation guide, export declaration 
business process flow, process specifications, including the XML 
Schema Definition (XSD);  
• Identify technical and legal gaps that must be resolved prior to the 
exchange of the e-SPS and provide recommendations on how to address 
any remaining gaps;  
• Develop the user acceptance process criteria and success indicators of 
the project, to ensure that these requirements are met. 
 
x) 
Assess the financial feasibility of developing a unified national digital export and 
animal health certificates system in Somalia (broader system capability), by 
analyzing costs associated with the development, procurement and establishment 
(including piloting and testing), implementation (deployment and scaling up), and 
maintenance, as well as an evaluation of future evolution and establishment of 
extension centers of the system at various export points across Somali livestock 
terminals. 
 
xi) 
Provide on a change management agenda and plan to facilitate a seamless transition 
from paper-based livestock export certification to robust digital systems 
(considering requirements enshrined on the trade protocols and MOUs between 
MoLFR and its trade partners) including training, capacity-building for relevant 
stakeholders and public awareness campaigns on process modernization. 
 
xii) 
Advise on robust key performance indicators (KPIs) that will be used to measure 
the success of the digital system, including improvements in trade volume, value, 
cost savings, and animal health outcomes, to feed into the DRIVE project’s 
monitoring and evaluation framework.
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
7 
xiii) 
Identify potential benefits, in terms of economic growth by the export-oriented 
livestock production, challenges and opportunities of expansion the Ministry to 
ponder of  
xiv) 
Synthesize the findings in i) to viii) above to: 
 
a) Develop the technical specifications, software and hardware requirements, general 
technical compliance requirements, and installation and operationalization of the 
proposed/studied national digital export and animal health certificate generating 
system. The firm will prepare the full set of technical specification and 
operationalization documents to be utilized in the procurement process of the good. 
 
b) Recommend the key specifications of the system in terms of functionality 
(certificate issuance, data management etc.), technical (accessibility, authentication, 
security, audit etc.), and other considerations such as multilingual support and 
contingency plans. 
  
5. Qualifications of the Firm and the Team of the Consultants  
 
5.1.The Eligible Firm(s) 
 
The firm must exhibit verifiable technical proficiency and capacity required to effectively carry 
out the entire scope of work and objectives of the consultancy and fulfill the specified 
qualifying and shortlisting criteria outlining below. 
 
• A minimum of 10 years of relevant experience in carrying out feasibility studies on 
digital exports certificate, phyto sanitary standards, development and operationalization 
in any state within the Horn of Africa, developing countries, in any context similar to 
Somalia or in advanced societies.  
 
• Working knowledge with government agencies, private sector actors such as livestock 
traders, livestock industry associations, exporters and importers and consultations is a 
requisite requirement for eligibility to carry this work.  
 
• Eligible firms should hold experience that should contain understanding in international 
livestock trade including the current policy, legal, regulatory and market system’s 
situation.  
 
• Eligible firm(s) must have a verifiable experience of implementing at least one contract 
in the past 5 years having experience of conducting feasibility study and development 
of a system technical specification, software and hardware requirements, general 
technical compliance requirements, and installation and operationalization of the 
system; preferably a system of export and animal health certificate generating system. 
 
• Experience on analysis of business processes, interconnectivity with Customs, 
reengineering to support improved clearance, experience in ePhyto implementation 
with respect to ASYCUDA Risk Management, ports and other systems such as Port 
Community System, etc.
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
8 
 
5.1.2. Expert Team Composition 
The consulting firm should demonstrate the following capacities/skills within its key expert 
staff, they should be of multi-disciplinary team, and with substantial expertise in carrying out 
feasibility study in agriculture/livestock economies: 
 
a) Regional Policy and Trade Expert (Key Export 1 - Team Leader): Proposed 
expert should hold more than 10 years’ proven professional experience in 
productive sector development, experience in leading, designing and managing 
technical studies in productive sector with special concentration in livestock 
economics. A minimum of master’s degree in development economics and 
trade, livestock economics or a related field is required.  
b) Livestock Value Chain and Market Systems Expert (Key Expert 2): He/she 
must be possessing minimum of 10 years’ professional experience in livestock 
market systems development, upgrading livestock value chains, processing and 
value addition. At least master’s degree in livestock husbandry and production 
or in a related field are desired. He or she should have an in-depth and strong 
understanding of livestock value chains and market systems development. 
c) IT and Business Systems Expert (Key Expert 3): Proposed expert should be 
holding advanced systems engineering master’s degree or computer science 
and relevant bachelor’s degree to the advanced education is required. Candidate 
must be having at least 10 years demonstrated and proven professional 
experience in designing, engineering and developing systems, particularly 
systems in productive sectors such as livestock or public veterinary services. 
He or she should demonstrate an in-depth knowledge of developing ISO and 
OIE standard certificate generating systems in the livestock arena or other 
related sector.  
d) International E-Phyto Specialist (Key Export 4): The consultant will assist 
the MOLF to develop the mechanism to adopt e-Phyto certificate. He/she must 
be holding around 8 years of experience in modernization of agricultural ( 
livestock agriculture sub sector) import and export processes, E-phyto 
implementation, and business process engineering.The candidate must have 
Master Degree in IT or related field and proven relevant experience working in 
developing electronic systems. Experience in e-Phyto related work is highly 
desirable with strong command of certification process of phytosanitary 
products and international best practices as recommended by the IPPC and 
FAO.Fluency in written and spoken English is mandatory. 
e) Animal Health Expert (Key Expert 5): A veterinary doctor with a minimum 
of 10 years strong professional experience in standardizing and developing 
national veterinary services. He or she must be holding master’s degree in 
veterinary medicine or animal health science.  
 
6. 
Reporting Arrangement and Structure  
The firm will work under the general supervision of the Director General, Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry and Range and engaging relevant departments of the ministry under the 
coordination of the DRIVE Project Focal Point at the MoLFR, it shall also provide weekly 
basis progress reports summarizing progress; challenges and presenting any issues that require 
action from the Ministry and Project team. The firm will further coordinate with the PIU of the 
DRIVE project through the existing coordination team at the MoLFR to include inputs from
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
9 
the relevant government agencies, where necessary. Sharing of work progress updates, 
stakeholder meetings, and workshops shall be conducted within the agreed timelines by the 
parties. A handover ceremony shall be conducted for the final close out of the consultancy 
works. 
 
7. 
Deliverables and Timelines of the Delivery for the Service 
The firm is expected to conclude the delivery of this consultancy service within 3 months. 
The percentage payments will be released to the consultant on the submission and 
acceptance/ approval of the deliverables (as mentioned below) by the competent authority of 
MoLFR (Client). Expected deliverables and an indicative timeline for delivery and payments 
is included below: 
 
D# 
Deliverable  
Timeline 
Payment schedule 
1 
Kick-off 
and 
foundational 
meeting/consultation with the Ministry 
relevant departments and stakeholders 
(within 7 days after contract signature) 
and submission of inception report and 
work plan outlining overall execution 
plan guaranteeing timely completion of 
the assignment. 
Within 15 days after 
contract signature. 
Payment of 10% of 
the signed contract 
amount 
2 
Draft feasibility study report together 
with the draft technical specification of 
the 
recommended 
certificate 
generating system (i.e., full drafts of 
items discussed under sections 3 and 4 
of the terms of the reference). 
Within 60 days after 
contract signature. 
Payment of 30% of 
the signed contract 
amount 
after 
acceptance of the 
draft report 
 
3 
Validation workshop on the feasibility 
study report containing all items under 
the scope of the assignment and 
objectives on sections 3 and 4 of the 
ToR.  
Within 72 days after 
contract signature. 
Payment of 20% of 
the signed contract 
amount 
 
4 
Final 
report/ 
versions 
of 
all 
deliverables, incorporating feedback 
and recommendations, including short 
read-out of consultations with relevant 
stakeholders and how they have been 
reflected. 
Within 90 days (3 
months) 
after 
contract signature. 
Final 
Payment 
of 
40% of the signed 
contract amount 
after acceptance of 
the deliverable by the 
client (MoLFR). 
 
 
8. 
Location of the Services 
The consultancy will be conducted in Somalia, particularly in Mogadishu and the 
administrative capital cities of the Somali Government federal member states. The firm will be 
required to assess the various paper-based certifications practiced at the states and the HQ 
centers of the Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range while also engaging main bodies of 
the relevant stakeholders such as livestock export trade groups, quarantine facilities, 
professional associations and customs authority at both the two layers of Somali Federal
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
10 
Republic. The assigned team of experts from the consulting firm are supposed to expect 
adequate travels to these stakeholders and locations to ensure informed actions are addressed 
towards the challenges and process transformation that this consultancy service is aiming to 
achieve.
