=== PAGE 1 ===
 
1 
 
General Information 
Agency Name 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations (FAO) 
Project Title 
RESTORE: restoring the riverine eco-systems for climate adap-
tation 
Consortium and downstream 
partners 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
CSO partner to be confirmed 
Project Location 
Middle and Lower Shabelle 
Target population 
1,500,000 individual beneficiaries  
Project Start & End Date 
December 2023 – 31 March 2028 (5 years) 
Project budget (GBP) 
35,000,000 
Primary Contact Person 
(name, position, email, tele-
phone, skype) 
Etienne Peterschmitt - FAO Representative (Etienne.Peter-
schmitt@fao.org) 
Ezana Kassa - Head of Programmes (Ezana.Kassa@fao.org) 
Ariane Luff - Head of Strategy and Resource Mobilization Unit 
(ariane.luff@fao.org) 
 
 
Project background 
Somalia has considerable productive resources which offer huge potential for delivering rapid eco-
nomic growth of critical importance to people’s livelihoods. These resources include 8.9 million hec-
tares of arable land (with 25 percent of crop production grown through irrigation systems), more than 
50 million livestock and about 1.8 million tons of fish annually for export1. Despite emitting just 0.003 
percent of all global green house gas emissions, Somalia finds itself on the frontline of climate change 
as a result of its social, economic and political conditions, as well as its geophysical characteristics. 
Climate change will continue to be a “risk multiplier”, causing displacement, conflict, exacerbation of 
water and food insecurity, and fragility unless adaptation is effectively embedded into the country’s 
overall management of risk reduction and resilience-building effort. The National Development Plans 
(2017–2019 and 2020–2024) consider climate action as essential for economic and social develop-
ment, as well as to ensure peace and security in the country. In addition, the provisional Constitution 
of Somalia contains a number of environmental provisions.  
 
Somalia’s recent history is marked by increasingly frequent and alternating climate shocks with the 
country experiencing either drought or flood, or both, in 19 of the last 20 years; with the last 10 years 
showing a marked rise in the frequency of such events.  
 
 
Figure 1. SWALIM Multi-Year Trend Analysis, 2023 
 
In recent years, Somalia has experienced multiple drought events, with the 2011 drought resulting in 
a famine that cost the lives of 260,000 people, the 2016–2017 drought resulted in losses and damages 
 
1 Somalia COMPACT, 2023
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
2 
 
estimated at US$ 3.25 billion (IFRC 2011) and the recent 2020-2022 drought was the worst in recent 
history costing more than 40,000 lives and leading the country once again to the brink of famine2.  
As of early 2023, some 6.5million people were still facing acute food insecurity3 with the first decent 
rains during Gu season allowing some respite in parts of the country. However, these rains were 
sporadic in terms of temporal and spatial distribution leading to flash floods in some areas. In fact, in 
May 2023 the Shabelle River experienced one of the largest floods on record due to above normal 
rainfall, causing farmers to lose the first decent harvest in three years. Heavy rains in Ethiopian high-
lands caused severe river flooding in parts of South and Central Somalia, while other parts have re-
ceived flash floods leading to destruction of property, farmlands, livelihood assets and displacement 
of people in the worst-affected areas such as in Belet Weyne town. Close to one million people were 
displaced by floods4. 
Now as of mid 2023, as the country faces a long path towards drought recovery, it is already facing 
its next challenge: an almost certain (>90%) likelihood of El Niño, combined with a positive Indian 
Ocean Dipole. Similar to the events of 1997 and 2006, this combination of meteorological phenomena 
is known as a ‘Super El Niño’ and in Somalia is usually associated with well above average rainfall 
resulting in severe flooding. Based on this analysis as well as the latest flood model data and river 
breakage analysis produced by FAO SWALIM, FAO anticipates a 100-year return period flood sce-
nario along the two main rivers of Somalia, which is expected to cause significant damage to liveli-
hoods and property and lead to displacement. Together with its resource partners, including the UK 
government, in the short-term FAO is advocating for a no regrets approach and has launched an El 
Niño Preparedness, Mitigation and Response plan outlining immediate actions that can mitigate the 
impact of flooding in riverine areas. However, flood and drought prevention require longer term invest-
ment in infrastructure that can divert excess water away from human settlements (such as Jowhar 
town) in times of above average rainfall (flood), as well as storing and re-directing it to enable its 
release in times of below average rainfall (drought).  
In addition to the increased frequency of water extremes, rainfall has also intensified in the recent 
past, with more intense rainfall events of short duration. This is a major hindrance for crop production 
that has evolved to receive the needed amount of water over the whole rainy season. What seems to 
emerge from the last decades of data is that the total amount of rainfall has not reduced but it is 
distributed across time and space in a way that is not beneficial for agriculture practices. This is also 
true for the natural ecosystems that especially in these morpho-climatic settings have evolved over 
millennia under stable rain regimes. The natural ecosystems are the other pillar of the economy of 
Somalia providing natural fodder for the livestock. The shift in rainfall regimes risks altering both agri-
cultural and pastoral practices if not managed, with the extreme risk of leading to their collapse. This 
recorded shift in rainfall regimes needs to be counterbalanced by a shift in the way the waters are 
managed. Failing to do so will result in the failure of the agro-pastoralist system with the result of the 
creation of an untenable load of new urban dwellers at the margin of society in most cases. 
Climate volatility is the new normal for Somalia and water is not only essential to human survival but 
also an integral part of climate resilience. Reliance on regular rainfall seasons is no longer viable for 
agricultural production, huge swathes of the country face water scarcity, while other parts have huge 
excesses of water that is not harnessed and causes extensive damage. Only through effective and 
sustainable water management and governance it is possible to reduce the impact of climate hazards 
in Somalia.  
Somalia has two main rivers, Juba and Shabelle with a total length of 2,300 kilometers (km), and has 
the longest coastline in mainland Africa of 3,333 km. These natural features present a myriad of op-
portunities for growth across all sectors, and especially in the management of water, building climate 
resilience for economic growth and helping communities to adapt to the cyclical climate shocks. These 
opportunities, coupled with the entrepreneurial spirit of Somali people give a projection of growth and 
 
2 From Insight to Action: Examining mortality in Somalia, 2023, FGS, FSNAU, WHO, UNICEF, LSHTM 
3 FSNAU post-deyr technical release available here: https://fsnau.org  
4 Danish Refugee Council, Flood update for Somalia, May 2023
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
3 
 
adaptation if resources are injected to support advancements in management of the key water re-
sources. The Juba and Shabelle perennial rivers in southern Somalia are crucial sources of water for 
daily use such as irrigation, food production and sustaining livestock herds during periods of serious 
drought. The absence of dependable water resource management institutions due to ongoing conflict, 
combined with the changed water cycles in the watersheds of both rivers due to climate change, has 
led to severe limitation of availability and access of water resources when they are needed. In addition 
to clashes between clans over access to water, there have been instances where Al Shabaab has 
exercised relevance as clan relations and the role of grieving marginalised groups and clans were, 
and remain, linked to conflict dynamics among dominant groups on a national scale. Political and clan 
elites may also capitalise on grievances to gain support for their political agenda, fuelling stronger 
resentment among groups as well as against the FGS and its allies.  
Early anticipatory preventive responses to emerging climate-related security risks can disrupt attempts 
by local and national elites to manipulate climate-change impacts. Importantly, such environmental 
peacebuilding efforts can enhance local and national capacities to resolve disputes peacefully. 
The WHO-UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) 2019 – SDG report estimates that 40% of 
existing water sources are non-functional resulting in shortages across the country. Weak water sup-
ply management models and the high costs of operating and maintaining water systems are some of 
the reasons behind the lack of functional water sources. Access to and use of safe water for human 
consumption is low in Somalia, with 69.4 per cent of Somalis using safely managed drinking water 
services. Just over half of Somalis have access to basic water services. In rural areas, only 28 per 
cent of the population have access to basic water services; about half of this population has limited 
access. About 23 per cent are drinking unimproved/unprotected water, and 5 per cent are drinking 
purely surface water.6 The 2022 drought in Somalia only served to heighten the existing water crisis 
in Somalia. A water assessment published in 2019 with the support of UNICEF highlighted that 2.7 
million people required humanitarian aid in the form of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) support. 
Specifically, one-third of households reported a lack of “sufficient drinking water” and about half re-
ported a lack of access to improved latrines, improved water sources and soap. 
Productive sector development (livestock, agriculture, fisheries) in Somalia is hindered by lack of 
transformative investment, limited policy and regulatory frameworks, and non-existent or dilapidated 
infrastructure (irrigation and flood control, energy, roads and transport systems as well as seaports, 
cold-chain storage, post-harvest storage etc.). The continued civil unrest and humanitarian crises 
put further strain on an already strained system. The ongoing conflict has led to the internal displace-
ment of over 3 million people in Somalia. This has led to the overuse of groundwater pumps and 
increased strain on infrastructure, leaving those in search of water found wanting. The hefty water 
costs of more than a dollar per cubic meter and the long distances individuals must travel to obtain 
water, along with the potential contamination of water, continue to be the greatest challenges for the 
poorest.  
Agriculture is an important economic activity in Somalia both in terms of meeting the food security 
needs of the population and generating income, with estimates putting the agriculture sector’s contri-
bution to the economy above 75 percent.5 The major cereal crops cultivated in Somalia are sorghum 
and maize. These crops are grown under both rainfed (sorghum) and under irrigated conditions 
(maize). Livelihoods based around rain-fed and riverine agriculture provide a significant proportion of 
food across the country but are extremely susceptible to increasingly unreliable rainfall and ever more 
frequent climate extremes (drought and flood) as well as conflict. Irrigated riverine agriculture is cen-
tred along the two rivers (Juba and Shabelle), which have provided water for irrigation for many dec-
ades, leading to the development of a settled population and well-established agricultural economy. 
In a good year, the country produces enough food to meet 40-50% of its cereal needs, relying heavily 
on imported food to fill the gap leaving it highly vulnerable to global market shocks, such as that seen 
 
5 World Bank Report CEM available here: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/781281522164647812/pdf/124651-REVISED-
Somalia-CEM-Agriculture-Report-Main-Report-Revised-July-2018.pdf
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
4 
 
as a result of COVID-19, which saw prices skyrockets by more than 50 percent in some regions. 
Reliance on imported food comes at a high cost, out of the reach of many, leaving large portions of 
the population dependent on humanitarian assistance. Up until the fall of the Siad Barre regime in the 
early nineties, Somalia had food sovereignty and good water governance, producing enough food and 
water security for domestic consumption as well as exporting some agricultural products to as far as 
Europe. This production was partially the result of significant investment by the Government in large-
scale irrigation infrastructure, particularly in the high-potential riverine areas in the south. This infra-
structure was built to harness and store excess water when available (flood or heavy rains) and enable 
it to be utilized in times of scarcity (drought); these systems have since fallen into disrepair. An exam-
ple of this is the Jowhar Offstream Storage Project (JOSP) works in conjunction with the upstream 
irrigation and flood relief canals, combined with a riverine embankment system that was able to man-
age flood risk in the Middle Shabelle and drought risk in Middle and Lower Shabelle supporting im-
proved food security outcomes within the regions and beyond (impacting national production levels). 
Investment in infrastructure rehabilitation, must be accompanied by investment in water storage/man-
agement and production assets and in the capacity of smallholder farmers and pastoralists who are 
the majority of communities in the Shabelle area. At the same time, sustainable exploitation of re-
sources must be ensured. There needs to be a balance between natural resource exploitation and 
environmental conservation through an understanding of context specific dynamics- soil fertility, sus-
tainable water sources, land utilization and access, all underpinned by a context-specific understand-
ing of the intersectionality in the social environment to inform strong inclusion and do-no-harm ap-
proaches in the project design. Natural Resource Management is a critical component to enhance 
local community leadership in the joint use and management of resources, including developing the 
capacity of first responders in conflict mitigation/ prevention, and sharpening their skills in Disaster 
Risk Management. Hence, the proposed project seeks to harmonize these elements of sustainability 
through collaborative approaches, employment of complementary financial resources, provision of 
technical expertise from various UN agencies, and partnership with local communities and authorities 
to collectively realize sustainable food security, generate peace dividends, and to identify and scale 
up best practices in the development of sustainable food systems in Somalia.  
While conflict in Somalia is largely the result of the presence of armed non-state actors, a recent 
FAO study6 found conflict and insecurity in origin areas of displacement were caused by multiple 
factors with 79.3 percent attributed to conflict over the natural resources of land, water and/or pas-
ture. Other causes of conflicts include forceful conscription of children by Al-Shabaab (AS), taxes 
levied by AS on households, insecurity in areas of origin and political differences. Primary displace-
ment drivers from rural areas are lack of water, food security and conflict.  Expanding resource avail-
ability and ensuring equitable access to these resources therefore has powerful implications on se-
curity and stability in the Somali context.  
Thus, large scale infrastructure investments and the resulting resources need to be managed by ef-
fective national, state and local level governance structures in an inclusive, conflict- sensitive manner. 
In addition to resource scarcity, equitable access to resources remains a significant issue in Somalia 
with resources, opportunities, and assets distributed along clan lines, with the major clans assuming 
leadership roles and assets. Consequently, minority clans have often been discriminated against; 
have less access to opportunities, leadership roles and resources. This has created unequal power 
relations that fuel discrimination, exclusion of minorities, and consequently lead to frequent flare-ups 
in the struggle for power, manifesting as violent conflict. This becomes more pronounced during peri-
ods of resource scarcity, as is often the case among conflicting pastoral and agro-pastoral communi-
ties.  
The JOSP command area (Jowhar district and northern Balad district) is inhabited by a majority Jareer 
population that, by all accounts, is marginalized. Abgaal sub-clans constitute a very powerful minority, 
 
6 Research on Rural Mobility, Displacement, Food Security and Livelihoods in Somalia, FAO 2022
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
5 
 
with a near monopoly over political and security organs, and significant dominance of the economy. 
Marginalized communities harbor long-standing grievances, many stemming from episodes of land 
grabbing and coercive property dispossession. According to a recent study commissioned by IOM, 
nearly all displaced populations in the command area belong to the marginalized majority Jareer com-
munities. 
Under these circumstances, the propensity for elite capture creates significant risks for large-scale 
investment in water and irrigation infrastructure at every stage of the project cycle: geographical tar-
geting and beneficiary selection in the design/inception phase, procurement and contracting in the 
early implementation phase, and the diversion of profits from increases in land value or public revenue 
generation in the late implementation and completion phases. These risks demand that every stage 
of programming be accompanied by analysis that can be triangulated (ie. led by a third-party) and a 
plan that not only disincentivizes capture but replaces avenues for capture by incentivizing collabora-
tion and creating meaningful, healthy interdependencies.      
Likewise, women face systemic discrimination in Somalia with limited access to resources and voice 
in decision-making, and limited representation in key fora. For this reason, transformational projects 
such as this looking to unlock substantial water resources particularly in southern Somalia, must con-
sider and actively seek to address the complex dynamics of land ownership and use, inclusive and 
equitable access, and management of resources, as well as durable solutions for displaced popula-
tions and social cohesion between groups. These aspects are also being actively addressed through 
complementary programming with specialized UN Agencies within the broader JOSP Programme, 
starting with interventions by IOM under the RESTORE project. 
 
With increasingly frequent and widespread crises leading to rising needs, and humanitarian budgets 
reducing year on year due to competing crises, global economic shocks and changing political land-
scapes, there is a growing imperative to identify and implement transformative solutions in Somalia; 
solutions which can reduce the growing humanitarian caseload and support a sustainable return to 
own production and self-sufficiency while promoting sustainable management of natural resources, 
contributing to peace, stability and social cohesion in conflict-affected parts of the country. The pro-
posed intervention comes at a pivotal moment. As the Somali Government launches its latest offen-
sive against Al Shabaab focusing on southern Somalia, swathes of territory - including the targeted 
command area - are under Government control for the first time in many years. This creates an 
opportunity for the Government to provide access to critical resources - such as water – decreasing 
the leverage of Al Shabaab over local populations in terms of resource control, as well as creating 
viable livelihood opportunities, thereby decreasing the incentive of youth to join the militia group. 
Finally, the emergence of a stronger, more capable Government who is prioritizing longer term solu-
tions to mitigate the impact of humanitarian crises, provides further incentive to restore productive 
capacity under national leadership and management. The project proposes a ‘build back better’ ap-
proach ensuring that, as systems are restored, they are also improved, applying holistic and ecosys-
tem-based approaches to natural resource and watershed management that take into account cur-
rent-day community and conflict dynamics and localized governance needs and opportunities. 
 
Project Targeting  
The project will directly target Jowhar and Balcad districts in Middle Shabelle region, Hirshabelle 
State initially, with direct benefits in terms of water availability and irrigation also for Afgoye, Merka 
and, Qoryoley districts in Lower Shabelle region of South West State once the system is fully re-
stored (see map in Annex 1). This is an area that is highly susceptible to floods in times of high-
water discharges and bursting, poorly maintained irrigation channels and lack of rainwater manage-
ment.7 The river overflow is worsened by the poor condition of the irrigation infrastructure, which 
causes flooding in areas of high urban and IDP density. While the town itself is not located on the 
most flood prone area, torrential rains and floods turn Jowhar into an island accessible only by boat 
 
7 European Environment Agency, Flood risks and environmental vulnerability, 2016
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
6 
 
from Balcad8. This means flooding affects many of the main roads (limiting food supply chains) and 
critical infrastructure such as the livestock market, cutting off access to outside resources such as 
specialized health facilities. Urban and rural flooding has also led to loss of crops and other livelihood 
assets for agro pastoralists. In fact, the flooding that affected Jowhar in May of 2021 as a result of 
Shabelle river breakage, destroyed 5,403 hectares of farmland leaving 1,880 households displaced. 9 
Small businesses and agri-preneurs were unable to transport produce to markets. Poorly managed 
floodwater also leads to increasing rates of water-borne disease and malaria in both urban and rural 
areas. IDP camps are identified as one of the most vulnerable structures, given their lack of physical 
sturdiness. They are also, generally, very exposed to floods as their location tends to be near the 
river, which makes them highly vulnerable to river breakages. The latest Camp Coordination and 
Camp Management (CCCM) IDP site verification report (conducted in October 2022) indicates that 
12 IDP sites (52%) have been classified as extreme risk (always floods) and 6 IDP sites (29%) as 
high risk (floods frequently).10   
The alluvial plains along the Juba and Shabelle rivers have historically been Somalia’s breadbasket, 
producing food for local consumption and for export for several decades through irrigated agriculture. 
The development of water resources in Jowhar began in the 1920s with the Jowhar Sugar Estate, 
which brought in a reliable supply of water, flood protection for irrigable land, and coordinated oper-
ation and maintenance of the water management system across Jowhar and Balcad districts. Prior 
to 1990, over 220,000 hectares of land along the flood plain were farmed through irrigation or reces-
sion farming, supplying crops to local and foreign markets.11 
The large piece of infrastructure known as the ‘FAO Canal’ (the canal was built by FAO in the 1980s, 
thereafter the local communities informally referred to it as FAO Canal), that starts in the barrage 
located at the village of Sabuun, feeds a large reservoir called the Jowhar Offstream Storage Project 
(JOSP). Until JOSP became operational, local communities were subject to the seasonal and annual 
vagaries of the Shabelle river, both in terms of water shortages (between January and April) and 
flooding (between May-June and October-December) every year. The implementation of the JOSP 
in 1980, provided a degree of regulation and control of the Shabelle water resources downstream of 
the Sabuun Barrage. During floods, water could be diverted into the 200 million m3 reservoir to 
reduce flood risk in Jowhar and further downstream. Release of the stored water in the dry season 
provided much needed water for Gu season cropping. The JOSP works in conjunction with the up-
stream irrigation and flood relief canals, combined with a riverine embankment system that was able 
to manage flood risk in the Middle Shabelle and drought risk in Middle and Lower Shabelle.  
Evidence suggests that the combination of FAO Canal and JOSP worked very well between 
1980 and 1990 contributing to the rapid development of Jowhar as an agricultural hub. During the 
war, the JOSP suffered extreme damage and vandalism with many components removed, effectively 
bringing its operation to a full stop. With JOSP in disrepair, the FAO Canal eventually completely 
dried out and was occupied by large numbers of IDPs who make use of the natural wetlands the 
reservoir was constructed on, to grow what they can. The rehabilitation of both the JOSP and the 
FAO Canal would be transformative to restart large-scale farming activities in the Jowhar area, to 
protect Jowhar town and irrigation schemes from floods, and to secure irrigation water during 
droughts. The JOSP also worked in tandem with the Double Flood Relief Channel (DFRC) in the 
Balcad natural reservoir approximately 25 km from Jowhar, and a system of riverine bunds to man-
age flood risk successfully in Middle Shabelle until the civil war in 1991. Following multiple consul-
tations with local government in Jowhar and Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MoAI), the reha-
bilitation of both the JOSP and the FAO canal has been identified as a key government priority for 
revitalizing agriculture and therefore boosting farmers’ incomes in and around Jowhar district.   
 
8 Puntland Post, November 2020 https://puntlandpost.net/2020/11/17/jowhar-cut-off-by-floodwater/   
9 Rapid assessment for the floods affected communities in Jowhar. Danish Refugee Council, 2021. 
10 CCCM Cluster Somalia Dashboard as of October 2023; https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/cccm-cluster-somalia-dashboard-october-
2022  
11 FAO; The Juba and Shabelle rivers and their importance to Somalia; June 2016
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
7 
 
The analysis carried out under the 2015 Mott MacDonald study confirms that, when operable, the 
JOSP improved water and food security, and resilience to both flooding and drought in Middle Sha-
belle, with potential positive impact on food security also in Lower Shabelle and beyond. Secondary 
benefits include potential to link production into humanitarian supply chains and reduce import de-
pendence. Full rehabilitation of both the JOSP and river embankments in Jowhar is expected to 
substantially reduce the impact of major flood events, such as that seen in May in Belet Weyne, 
thanks to the rehabilitation of river embankments using technically sound, innovative and sustainable 
solutions. The rehabilitated JOSP would provide, a maximum of 200 million m3 of additional irrigation 
water per year12. The 2015 study identifies that the JOSP system is in a completely non-operable 
state; notwithstanding this, the basic infrastructure remains substantially intact. Therefore, it is ex-
pected that the JOSP can be rehabilitated at reasonable and economically viable cost. The JOSP 
rehabilitation works identified in the program include:  
• 
Rehabilitation of the Sabuun barrage wall  
• 
Replacement of the hydraulic gates and operating gear for the main water control struc-
tures 
• 
Desilting of the supply canal and the outlet canal 
• 
Repair, strengthening river embankments on the river and off stream reservoir. 
Several interventions have rehabilitated elements of the water management infrastructure in and 
around the Middle Shabelle region (approximately between 2022 until 2015), including parts of the 
JOSP and DFRC, and opened up additional cropping area for smallholder farmers, however these 
measures have been insufficient to address the flooding in and around Jowhar. 
Area-specific natural hazards: 
As mentioned above, Jowhar is located in the Hirshabelle river floodplain, an area that is highly 
susceptible to floods. The existing ecosystem and presence of (albeit degraded) irrigation infrastruc-
ture in Jowhar provides an opportunity to protect and enhance the resilience of the most vulnerable 
people in the area. The Shabelle river is the main source of water for daily use such as irrigation, 
food production and sustaining the livestock herds. The absence of dependable water resource gov-
ernance mechanisms has led to severe degradation of water resources. The wetlands to the north 
and east of the district act as a buffer preventing devastating flooding in the city, indicating that the 
wetlands and the riparian vegetation are key preventative, natural measures to flood reduction and 
building environmental resilience. In addition to flood control, wetlands around Jowhar provide water 
filtration. Riparian vegetation extends laterally from rivers or irrigation channels including floodplains, 
controlling sediment, reducing opportunity for flood damage, helps filtrate stagnant water reducing 
water-borne disease, and support riverbank stabilization. Forests in the riparian zone filter water, 
stabilize eroding banks, provide shade, shelter and food for fish and aquatic organisms, and provide 
wildlife habitat and corridors for terrestrial organisms and protecting cropland and downstream com-
munities from flood damage.   
Widespread deforestation and soil degradation from poor agricultural practices, overgrazing of 
rangelands combined with climate change impacts threaten the economic growth prospects but also 
the viability of Somalia’s traditional nomadic pastoralism and rain-fed crop cultivation. 
According to IOM and UNEP’s study on climate-adaptive solutions to displacement,13  84% of cli-
mate-induced IDPs burn their trash directly or indirectly. Such poor environmental practices can 
eventually lead to disastrous impact on soil, water and air as indicated by a similar study carried out 
in the Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya.14 Poor water management combined with the burning of solid 
waste and dust particles from eroded land cause air quality issues/air pollution in Jowhar. Water 
pollution caused by waste in the Shabelle River worsens the accumulation of silt, causing more 
flooding and damaging farmland. Infiltration of polluted water also leads to soil pollution that results 
in poor soil filtration properties and poor production, especially if not managed with good agricultural 
practices.  
 
12 Mott MacDonald Feasibility Study, 2015 
13 Identifying Climate Adaptive Solutions to Displacement in Somalia, IOM-UNEP, 2021 
14 Identifying Climate Adaptive Solutions to Displacement in Somalia, IOM, UNEP; February 2023
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
8 
 
If these hazards are not mitigated it may bring high impacts to vulnerable zones such as systematic 
crop loss, forced internal displacement due to lack of resources and livelihood options, and a desta-
bilization of the basic means of survival. The project will therefore conduct more detailed analysis of 
the ecosystem services provided by the wetlands and riparian vegetation in the area, in order to 
further understand their role in flood and drought mitigation and how to enhance it. 
Livelihood systems:  
Livelihoods systems in Jowhar district and adjacent villages are largely group specific. The majority 
of communities are engaged in farming (maize, sorghum, rice, sesame and some vegetables), with 
a few branching into agro-pastoralism on a small scale in order to sell dairy products (ghee, milk and 
cheese). Many of the villages are located between 5 km and 20 km from Jowhar town. Livelihoods 
are not as gendered as, for example, some of the communities in Burao or Galkayo. Both women 
and men work on their family’s farms and/or as casual labourers on the farms of others. If there is a 
surplus of produce, the communities sell it at the Jowhar markets. However, men have more job 
opportunities than women do. While few women can work as teachers or henna artists in addition to 
working on the family farms; men can engage in various income generating activities from operating 
a shop or a stall in the market to sell produce to taking on jobs as construction labourers. Pastoral 
communities move from one area to another during the dry season, returning to their villages during 
the wet season, very few communities practice transhumance (moving livestock between customary 
grazing areas).15 
The dominant long-running challenge was identified as the lack of capital or financial resources to 
improve farms as well as access to agricultural extension services. There is no farm machinery to 
assist with ploughing and harvesting, limiting agricultural productivity and making farmers heavily 
dependent on casual labour. Another key challenge is the high risk of flash flooding from the river, 
which destroys crops and causes waterlogging.  
Conflict analysis 
The growth in Jowhar has always been determined by the Shabelle river, following three distinct 
spatial zones: to the west of the river, the largest area of urban villages of Hantiwadag and Kulmis, 
and two different areas to the east of the river: Horseed and Buulo Sheikh. The two areas to the east 
have grown in an informal pattern without substantially increasing in density, leaving an area along 
the river without formal infrastructure. Jowhar is surrounded in all directions by cropland, and with 
the increase in flooding events in and around the city, and the substantial increase of IDPs in recent 
years with no regulating action to manage new growth, Jowhar is likely to struggle with land disputes 
over access to agricultural land. The district may also see a continued trend of urban fragmentation, 
illegal occupation, and difficulty in provision and access of basic services and infrastructure.16  
IDPs have moved to the north, east and south of Jowhar in close proximity to the river and already 
degraded irrigation canal infrastructure to ensure water access for crops and livestock. As CCCM 
most recent assessment indicates there are almost 77,000 recorded IDPs living in 21 settlements in 
and around Jowhar, mostly living along the river which puts them right at the epicenter of flood risk, 
causing loss of livelihoods, worsening food insecurity, water-borne diseases, and further displace-
ment. Disputes between clans, IDPs and host communities over natural resources (land, water, pas-
ture) and productive assets remain a potential challenge. While in some villages, water management 
committees play an important role in managing the irrigation infrastructure and equitable access to 
water for each farm, some villages have no such structure. The lack of adequate local governance 
mechanisms of scarce resources leads to frequent conflicts between clans, host communities and 
IDPs as well as between user groups. The proximity of villages to the Shabelle River determines the 
scale of disputes. Large-scale disputes and even armed conflicts arise during the droughts and dry 
seasons, when pastoralist and agro-pastoralist groups seek water for their farms and pasture for 
animals.  
Some anecdotal evidence suggests19 that Al-Shabaab is partially active in some remote areas of 
Jowhar district and that some flash flooding incidents were natural, but some incidents were caused 
 
15 Livelihoods, conflict and mediation: Somalia. SPARC knowledge. September 2022. 
16 Jowhar Urban Profile; FGS, IOM, UN-Habitat; November 2020
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
9 
 
by actors linked with Al-Shabaab breaching the riverbanks. Al-Shabaab has a long history of oper-
ating around Jowhar. The town was captured by Al-Shabaab during 2009 to 2012, before its libera-
tion by forces of the Somali National Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The 
approximate territorial control of Al-Shabaab near the villages was believed to have extended from 
Jowhar to Mogadishu as of December 2021.20 Evidence from IOM and FAO programming in the 
area suggests important linkages between resource access and Al-Shaabab control. Where govern-
ment and local authorities can provide sustainable access to (water) resources to support production 
and stability, Al-Shabaab loses its foothold amongst local populations and there is reduced support 
for extremism or likelihood of recruitment as a livelihood strategy. In-depth understanding of social 
and conflict dynamics in the project area is inherent to the success of the project and overall pro-
gramme. Recognising this, a dedicated assessment has been launched in the context of the pro-
grame-level preliminaries and will be used to inform adaptive programme design and implementa-
tion.  
Elite Capture 
As described above, the demographics and political economy of Jowhar and Balad districts generate 
a significant risk of elite capture. The risk is heightened by an imbalance that already exists between 
the powerful elite and the more vulnerable marginalized populations – a cleavage that runs along 
clan lines, adding a layer of potential volatility. IOM, FAO, UNEP and World Vision have developed 
and tested implementation modalities that are designed to incentivize collaboration over competition. 
The ‘environmental peacebuilding’ model, which is described in detail in Output 1, below, broadens 
the inclusivity of existing natural resource management mechanisms and frameworks by identifying 
a set of mutual benefits and building in a reward structure for collaboration and cooperation. In the 
context of the JOSP command area, the objective for each phase of investment is to enhance the 
political, economic, and property rights of the marginalized communities residing in the area, which 
constitute the vast majority of IDPs and the inhabitants of most rural villages. In addition to the envi-
ronmental peacebuilding interventions, the program will incorporate Durable Solutions methodolo-
gies and leverage complimentary Durable Solutions programs to address the needs of the most 
vulnerable IDPs (see below).            
Displaced Populations 
Displaced populations in or around the Jowhar reservoir using the natural wetlands for agricultural 
production, is an aspect that has been considered in the project and broader programme design (and 
risk management strategy). IOM and FAO are still carrying out assessments to establish the extent 
of the inhabited area around the reservoir. This was flagged in the 2015 Mott MacDonald feasibility 
study as a potential issue, however current data from IOM does not show populations living close to 
or inside of the reservoir. However, anticipating this as a potential concern with implications on pro-
gramming, partners have established working relationships within the broader JOSP programme 
(see Annex 5) clear synergies with other projects implementing durable solutions in the area are 
foreseen. The Danish Government has announced a new project implemented by IOM and UNEP 
called “Forging a Greener Peace in the Hirshabelle State of Somalia” that will be specifically focused 
on finding solutions for displaced populations in and around the reservoir.  
Following the OECD DAC Recommendations on the Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus 
(HDPN), the Danish government aims to operationalize the interconnections between pillars by sup-
porting coherent and complementary coordination, programming, and financing of humanitarian, de-
velopment, and peace interventions that are based on shared analyses of contexts and conflicts.  
Target population: 
Overall, it is estimated that approximately 1,650,000 beneficiaries living in peri-urban and rural ar-
eas across five districts will directly benefit from the JOSP once full functionality is restored with 
anticipated far-reaching spin-off effects benefitting the population across the two target regions in 
terms of increasing water access, decreasing flood and drought vulnerability while also increasing 
local food availability, decreasing food insecurity and import dependence, and generating income 
that is expected to support local economic development (see also Value-for-Money section below).
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
10 
 
This project together with others within the JOSP programme will substantially contribute to achieving 
this with an estimated 828,11917 persons supported through the project (see Annex 4 for additional 
details). Direct project beneficiaries are based on project-specific outcomes as reflected below. 
 
The project roughly groups beneficiaries into several categories. Flood risk reduction, drought miti-
gation beneficiaries are estimated based on geographical locations and livelihood groups (see detail 
in Annex 4). Likewise, estimated number of people accessing improved irrigation is based on riverine 
livelihood groups expected to access the restored infrastructure. These numbers are estimates 
based on current available data specifically FSNAU population and livelihood group data and 
SWALIM flood model and land cover data. They are subject to change once detailed baseline data 
has been collected.  
 
Access to early warning and climate change forecasting will target a larger group consisting of all 
communities that are presently living or who have previously settled in and around the command-
areas and are using the natural and water resources of Middle and Lower Shabelle. Within this larger 
groups are the small groups of beneficiaries that receive the benefits of risk reduction, water access, 
nature-based solutions, agro-ecology and Disaster Risk Reduction at community level. These are 
approximately 7,000 HHs in villages around the JOSP reservoir that are subject to flood risk.  They 
will be involved in the determination of the priorities for assistance and eventually will have to actively 
participate in all future interventions in the natural and water resources activities. The expected num-
ber of people to benefit directly from the reservoir needs to be determined during the baselines based 
on actual population in the surrounds as well as the downstream reach of water flows once full ca-
pacity is restored. Rebuilding the eco-systems in the area will also contribute to rebuilding the long-
term sustainability of the environment that will provide long term adaptation to the climate changes 
projected in the area. The institutional target group is the government stakeholders of the depart-
ments of MoECC, MoEWR and MoAI, whose knowledge in NWRM project planning and implemen-
tation will be upgraded, thus enabling them to continue irrigation scheme rehabilitation on their own 
once the project comes to an end after five years.  Eventually, the establishment of Jowhar Off 
Stream Program Central Management Organization (JP CMO) and National Water Coordination Fa-
cility (NWCF) will benefit the whole country by ensuring sustainable and efficient use of the available 
natural and water resources and improved food security and climate resilient livelihoods. Such in-
vestments also contribute to economic growth, reduced dependence on imports and can also plug 
into the humanitarian supply chain to reduce the cost of response. 
Although the project will be following area-based development approaches the local communities 
(including IDPs) living in the Jowhar district will benefit from project interventions, the ecosystem 
approaches to natural and water resources management applied here are the core of a country-wide 
strategy. Parallel and complementary to this project, the JOSP programme includes other special-
ized UN Agencies: FAO, UNEP, UN-Habitat, UNIDO and IOM with firm commitments obtained to 
date from USAID, and priority shortlisted projects with the Somalia Joint Fund and the Peacebuilding 
Fund (PBF) making a total of USD 81 million against the USD 105 million required. This funding will 
allow FAO to fully undertake all of the productive infrastructure works required as well as comple-
mentary actions integral to the programme’s success. Current gaps are principally on scaling up 
Climate Smart Agriculture, which will come in a next phase, after infrastructure rehabilitation. 
 
Project approach and intervention  
The overall objective of the proposed project is the creation of a conducive environment for natural 
and water resources management in order to (i) reduce poverty, (ii) ensure household food security, 
(iii) make sustainable use of natural and water resources, (iv) increase resilience of at-risk commu-
nities to the impacts of climate change.  
 
17 Project specific numbers are based on notional estimates as a proportion of the overall programme as re-
flected in Annex 4. Outcome specific beneficiaries represent the direct beneficiaries of project outcomes.
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
11 
 
 
Theory of Change 
 
The overall JOSP Theory of change can be expressed as follows:  
 
IF critical productive and protective (flood and drought) infrastructure is restored AND ecosystem 
approaches are applied to protect and enhance the natural resource base AND communities are 
engaged in a conflict-sensitive manner that takes into account the needs and vulnerabilities of differ-
ent user groups AND effective, accountable, financially and technically viable institutional and com-
munity governance mechanisms are established...  
  
THEN flood and drought risk will be substantially reduced, sustainable natural resource management 
and intercommunal peace will support stability, security and better production; enhanced food secu-
rity and income generation will render communities less susceptible to future shocks and stresses 
(decreasing humanitarian caseloads) enabling access to capital to re-invest into local economies 
supporting economic growth and enhanced wellbeing; and inclusive and representative Government 
and community led and operated management structures will ensure effective and equitable opera-
tion and management of the infrastructure and its dividends (water access)...  
  
FOR climate resilient, safe and prosperous communities in Middle Shabelle and beyond. 
 
Within this, the RESTORE investments concentrate specifically on infrastructure rehabilitation, nat-
ural resource management and environmental health, durable solutions and conflict risk reduction, 
and governance, complementing other projects within the JOSP architecture. Therefore, recognizing 
the complementarity with other JOSP actions, the RESTORE theory of change could be expressed 
as follows: 
 
IF productive and protective (flood and drought) infrastructure is restored applying ecosystem and 
climate adaptive agro-ecology approaches; AND conflict-sensitive and inclusive infrastructure and 
natural resource governance mechanisms are co-developed with and adopted by communities and 
Government; AND community disaster risk profiles are analysed and risk reduction strategies devel-
oped and deployed;  
 
THEN communities will benefit from equitable and reliable access to water for productive use, re-
duced flood and drought risk associated with enhanced storage capacity (reservoir), as well as in-
formation on specific risks and actionable preventive measures for more climate resilient livelihoods; 
better environmental health combined with environmental peacebuilding approaches will support 
more sustainable and inclusive access to and exploitation of natural resources over time; intentional 
intercommunal engagement in the design and implementation of mechanisms governing resource 
access and use (water and land) together with effective institutional (inter-ministerial) governance 
mechanisms involving relevant (Federal, State and local level) authorities and all end user groups 
will reduce the risk of conflict stemming from increased resource availability (water) and potential for 
competition over land and other resources as well as ensuring the sustainable operation and mainte-
nance of infrastructure laying the foundations... 
 
FOR improved local and regional food production, enhanced food security and income generation; 
enhanced resilience to climate shocks and more peaceful and prosperous communities.  
This theory of change is underpinned by a critical intersectoral and multi-faceted baseline and mon-
itoring & learning data that will inform the overall JOSP programme design, implementation and iter-
ative adaptation as well as interventions by other actors in the same area base. 
The project is designed to achieve four outcomes below, which are mutually reinforcing to deliver 
the proposed paradigm shift:
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
12 
 
Outcome 1: Ecosystem and conflict-sensitive approaches to Natural Resource Management 
and Infrastructure rehabilitation and governance are assessed and applied  
Under Outcome 1, the project will provide detailed baseline information on soil, water and environ-
mental health for an enhanced understanding of the natural resource base as well as the intercom-
munal dynamics surrounding this as a foundation for the more effective and equitable management 
of the same and a reduced risk of resource-based conflict. Complementing the other programme 
level preliminary assessments18, the project will also conduct a gender analysis exploring localized 
challenges to women and youth’s active participation and representation within governance struc-
tures responsible for ensuring the equitable access to and sustainable exploitation of resources (wa-
ter) made available by this project. The data collected by these studies will be incorporated into the 
Human Ecology Assessment Tool, a platform designed to enable the social and political-economic 
data to ’engage‘ with the physical data collected by FAO SWALIM and FSNAU. It will also restore 
the functionality of the large-scale offstream reservoir infrastructure providing communities in the 
target area access to improved and climate-resilient water management and eco-systems control, 
ensuring reliable and equitable access to water resources amongst different groups and communi-
ties and rendering them less susceptible to seasonal rainfall variability, as well as flood and drought 
events. The multi-indicator early warning system will monitor soil health, water health and soil mois-
ture content to inform NRM NbS actions and Anticipatory Action.  This will include responding to 
increased risks of salinity, water turbidity, high soil saturation and low soil moisture content.  This 
analysis is then used to respond to increases in environmental risks and also serves as a proxy for 
conflict risk to be monitored and responded to.    
Nature-Based Durable Solutions and Environmental Peacebuilding: A Model 
 
 
 
 
The JOSP command area (Jowhar district and northern Balad district) is inhabited by a majority 
Jareer population that, by all accounts, is marginalized. Abgaal sub-clans constitute a very powerful 
minority, with a near monopoly over political and security organs, and significant dominance of the 
economy. Marginalized communities harbor long-standing grievances, many stemming from epi-
 
18 Funded by USAID TRANSFORM project under the broader JOSP Programme umbrella.
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
13 
 
sodes of land grabbing and coercive property dispossession. According to a recent study commis-
sioned by IOM, nearly all displaced populations in the command area belong to the marginalized 
majority Jareer communities. 
Under these circumstances, the propensity for elite capture creates significant risks for large-scale 
investment in water and irrigation infrastructure at every stage of the project cycle: geographical 
targeting and beneficiary selection in the design/inception phase, procurement and contracting in the 
early implementation phase, and the diversion of profits from increases in land value or public reve-
nue generation in the late implementation and completion phases. These risks demand that every 
stage of programming be accompanied by analysis that can be triangulated (ie. led by a third-party) 
and a plan that not only disincentivizes capture, but replaces avenues for capture by incentivizing 
collaboration and creating meaningful, healthy interdependencies.      
To achieve this objective, UNEP, IOM, and FAO have developed and tested a model to incentivize 
collective action around equitable and sustainable natural resource management.  
1. The first step is to frame and target the intervention by juxtaposing the physical and human 
geographies, analyzing where the most significant sociopolitical cleavages between popula-
tions are exacerbated by stressors imposed on a shared ecosystem, then look at how the 
same ecosystem creates mutual benefits for both communities, and what (formal/informal) 
institutions already exist for managing the ecosystem. (A prime example in riverine areas are 
the canal or irrigation committees). The methodology for investigating these dynamics in-
volves the incorporation of IOM’s established Community Stabilization Index (COSI) and Lo-
cal Reintegration Assessment (LORA) into the Human Ecology Assessment Tool.      
2. Bring the informal institutions and other stakeholders together (even if dialogue with the dis-
puting parties has to occur separately) to understand what the most significant challenges 
are and to figure out the most pragmatic opportunities for engagement. We refer to this as 
mobilizing Integrated Natural Resource Management (INRM) networks. Once it is understood 
where priorities overlap between communities and INRM networks, we introduce the incen-
tive structure of the Matching Grant Mechanism.  
3. By highlighting the immediate mutual benefits that will accrue from jointly financing and fund-
raising a project (ie. the immediate cash injection by the project that doubles the pooled re-
sources of the two hostile communities), it is much more likely that groups will come together 
to contribute. Even if done so grudgingly, the window is now open for deeper engagement. 
4. The same incentive structure can be used to (a) enhance the inclusivity of the informal insti-
tutions, and (b) to link up the informal institutions with formal government structures by facil-
itating or channelling the distribution of government revenues. In contexts where there is no 
formal system of taxation (but where govt administrators collect revenue nonetheless), the 
matching grant mechanism can be used to harness more impactful public expenditure, based 
on consensus.  
5. Collective investments in infrastructure or systems that support regenerative agricultural 
practices, water harvesting, or holistic rangeland techniques feed into the circular bioecon-
omy – emphasizing the use of renewable natural capital (see Outcome 2). These innovative 
practices are low-tech and self-reinforcing. 
Outcome 2: Climate adaptive agro-ecology practices and infrastructure promote sustainably 
enhanced food production and environmental health 
Under Outcome 2, the project will promote resilient, adaptive and transformative agroecological man-
agement, supporting farmers to apply good agricultural practices to reduce their vulnerability to ex-
treme hazards and to enhance system function restoration relevant to climate-resilient agriculture. 
This will allow local communities to increase the productivity of their agroecosystems while also en-
abling them to diversify household incomes and assets, enhancing their resilience in the face of 
increasingly frequent climate shocks (drought and flood). Moreover, they will have a strengthened 
awareness of climate threats and risk-reduction processes and be equipped with the tools and 
knowledge to adapt to the anticipated worsening impacts of climate change.
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
14 
 
Outcome 3: Enhanced institutional and community-level climate disaster risk profiling and 
management  
Under Outcome 3, the project will improve risk awareness and monitoring through the installation 
and operation of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) and water level sensors at strategic locations 
allowing for the detection, monitoring and analysis of rainfall and run-off, and supporting the devel-
opment of more accurate flood models. It will also integrate the outcomes of the data-driven flood 
model with the local knowledge and Impact Based Forecasting (IBF) into an accurate and timely 
Early Warning System (EWS). The project will enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities and 
ecosystems through the implementation of community-led climate change adaptation and mitigation 
actions as well as developing capacity of vulnerable households, communities and local government 
to withstand natural disasters through the implementation of community-owned DRR measures. 
These plans will be linked to seasonal anticipatory actions by community.  All this will ensure vulner-
able communities better understand risks and are better prepared to anticipate and respond to as-
sociated shocks informing localized adaptation and mitigation. World Vision is well positioned to 
support rapid and evidence-based application of the crisis modifier to stabilize community resilience 
gains, protect livelihoods and lives based on community-identified resilience priorities. WVI will facil-
itate communities to undertake a participatory gender, conflict and vulnerability community assess-
ment (GCVCA) process to establish a community adaption framework. Communities will be facili-
tated to identify and prioritize interventions to support adaptation to climate change and emergent 
opportunities.  Community Action Plans co-created by communities and government bring local 
stakeholders together in an empowering learning process that builds adaptive capacity at commu-
nity-level, while also resulting in tangible but flexible action plans for communities to reduce, over-
time, their vulnerability to climate change.   
  
Outcome 4: Enhanced institutional capacity for responsible Governance of Water and land 
resources and infrastructure  
Under Outcome 4, the project will support the GoS National Water Resource strategy roadmap im-
plementation at state and federal level, facilitating multi-stakeholder and multi-level coordination and 
governance mechanisms and strengthening the capacities of MoAI, MoECC and MOEWR on the 
governance of natural and water resources management. The project will equip key stakeholders 
with strategic analysis to inform decision-making thus supporting the enabling environment to imple-
ment and scale up climate-resilient agroecological management, climate-informed water resources 
management, and support access to climate finance mechanisms. Improved institutional support 
and capacity for climate adaptative approaches to natural resource management will be supported 
and governance structures will be created at the state level, to enable long-term planning and main-
streaming of this approach at the national level.  
The food security and nutrition situation in Somalia remains in a precarious state. While there have 
been marginal improvements, the current and projected levels of acute food insecurity and malnutri-
tion in Somalia continue to remain high. Although drought has ended, its extended impacts persist 
and are currently being compounded by El Nino-induced flooding in several parts of Somalia. There-
fore, close monitoring of the food security and nutrition situation, as well as conducting timely as-
sessments and analysis, remains vital. Unfortunately, the current institutional capacity of the Gov-
ernment of Somalia is limited in its ability to generate and provide essential data for informed deci-
sion-making.  
To address this shortfall, the FAO-led Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU) plays a 
pivotal role by delivering critical and timely information and analyses concerning the food security 
and nutrition landscape in Somalia to a broad range of stakeholders. The information and analyses 
generated by FSNAU are instrumental in enabling effective, evidence-based decision-making to sup-
port humanitarian, recovery and development interventions. FSNAU works in close collaboration with 
Government and technical partners to identify food-insecure populations across Somalia. Further-
more, it identifies the specific challenges that confront vulnerable groups in their pursuit of food se-
curity and offers timely and quality reports to inform targeted interventions. In addition to its early
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
15 
 
warning function, FSNAU carries out in-depth baseline livelihood assessments to offer an improved 
understanding of the underlying causes of food, nutrition and livelihood insecurity. Additionally, 
FSNAU provides food security and nutrition related technical and institutional capacity development 
support to Somali institutions. 
Through sustained capacity development support, Somali institutions will be able to develop, in 3-5 
years’ time, technical capacity that will enable them to conduct food security and nutrition assess-
ments and subsequent analyses, with limited external technical support. However, achieving this 
result will require additional substantial and sustained investment in institutional capacity develop-
ment over the same period (3-5 years).  In readiness for the gradual transfer of capacities, a capacity 
gap assessment of key FGS institutions was conducted in 2022 and the assessment results were 
validated in 2023 during a workshop involving the FGS institutions. The next steps in the process 
include: I) the development of a comprehensive (multi-year) institutional capacity development pro-
gramme (with budget, work plan and results framework with milestones to be achieved) based on 
the results of the capacity assessment and identified priority gaps; ii) Once finalized, the programme 
document and budget will be presented to resource partners before the end of this year; The institu-
tional capacity development progamme, it’s full financing and implementation is the main mechanism 
for effective transfer of FSNAU functions to government (exit plan). iii) To complement this endeavor, 
FSNAU plans to provide targeted capacity development support to key Somali institutions including 
training in IPC Acute Food Insecurity (IPC AFI), IPC Acute Malnutrition (IPC AMN), training on 
SMART nutrition survey methodology, training on food security and nutrition outcome indicators, 
participation in seasonal food security and nutrition assessments and subsequent IPC analyses. 
FSNAU will also provide technical and administrative support for the implementation and main-
streaming of the recommendations from the recently concluded Independent IPC Review. 
Outcome 1. Ecosystem and conflict-sensitive approaches to Natural Resource Management 
and Infrastructure rehabilitation and governance are assessed and applied  
Output 1.1 Natural resource and baseline data generation, analysis and monitoring 
1.1.1 
Detailed baseline for JOSP command area (land cover) including Landscape analysis plan-
ning and management for water storage; 
1.1.2 
JOSP Gender Analysis;19 
1.1.3 
Environmental Analysis of eco-systems and Soil Health 
1.1.4 
JOSP Water resource monitoring 
1.1.5 
Crop and ecosystem monitoring (objective data collected along sample transects, for exam-
ple using LIDAR) 
1.1.6 
Establish Ecosystem, soil health and vegetation loss monitoring system. 
1.1.7 
Establish Ecosystems Early Warning Systems from the monitoring system. 
Output 1.2 Restoration and sustainable management of reservoir for flood and drought resil-
ience 
1.2.1 Hawadley reservoir rehabilitation using Nature Based Solutions (NbS) to enhance availabil-
ity of water resources, enhanced climate resilience of infrastructure and reduce flood risk 
supporting risk reduction and sustainable production.  
1.2.2 Community based NbS for water and soil management (applying the NbS from the previous 
FCDO project catalogue20 linked farmers groups. 
1.2.3 Nature based durable solutions/climate security 
1.2.4 Support the return of native biodiversity by  restoring native flora species 
1.2.5 Implementation and management of the Ramsar protected site, followed by accreditation 
and protection planning (linked to Outcome 4) 
Output 1.3: NRM Governance for equitable access and conflict mitigation.  
 
19 This is one of eight preliminary assessments foreseen under JOSP that will be critical to informing the overall programme as well as 
RESTORE project activities under outcomes 2 and 3. 
20 https://unepdhi.org/our-services/special-focus-nature-based-solutions/
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
16 
 
1.3.1 Conflict dynamics analysis over natural resources to inform land use, land tenure and con-
flict mitigation activities.    
1.3.2 NRM governance at government and community levels to ensure equitable access for all 
stakeholders. 
1.3.3 Conflict dynamics analysis over natural resources to inform land use, land tenure and con-
flict mitigation activities. 
1.3.4 Community NRM works informed by collective planning between host, IDPs and competing 
clans on natural resource of common interest.  
1.3.5 Conflict mitigation over water and land access at govt and community levels.   
1.3.6 Linkage to stabilization and durable solution programming where NRM is linked to conflict 
and marginalization. 
Outcome 2: Climate adaptive agro-ecology practices and infrastructure promote sustainably 
enhanced food production and environmental health 
 
Output 2.1: Agro-ecology food systems are supported with extension services and promoted 
with communities to increase HH production and nutrition.  
2.1.1 Farm planning services are provided through government extension center to small holders.  
2.1.2 Agro-ecology demonstration farms and farmer field schools for agro-ecology, agroforestry, 
forest gardening GAP and FMNR 
2.1.3 Promotion \ of diverse, locally suited input varieties and tools for support small holder uptake 
of Agro-ecology, forest gardening, agroforestry, GAP and FMNR. 
2.1.4 Extension services and in field technical support for agro-ecology, GAP and FMNR via gov-
ernment and partner to small holder farmers 
2.1.5 Development of bio-fertilizer and integrated pest management services and products to sup-
port small holder farmers to move away from chemical inputs. 
2.1.6 Support to recycling all farm products and waste into fertilizer and animal feed products.  
2.1.7 Development of flood tolerant agriculture options for high-risk years (e.g., flood recession 
farming) 
Output 2.2: Development of agroecology practice that supports sustainable agriculture and 
livestock production at village and household level 
2.2.1 Assessment and community agreement of infrastructure needs for sustainable agriculture; 
2.2.2 Design of infrastructure options with community consultation, ESS and NbS (see outcome 
1); 
2.2.3 Implementation of irrigations systems, water harvesting structures, drainage of flood prone 
land; 
2.2.4 Community implemented works of productive infrastructure (see outcome 3 CAPs) where 
possible for community production infrastructure and NbS (linked to Outcome 1); and,  
2.2.5 Monitoring of soil and water health in infrastructure sites over seasons. 
Outcome 3: Enhanced institutional and community-level climate disaster risk profiling and 
management  
Output 3.1: Improved risk knowledge for climate hazard prediction and planning to inform 
climate change adaptation and resilience building.  
3.1.1 Detection, monitoring and analysis of hydro-climatic parameters (rainfall, temperature, solar 
radiation, humidity, river levels, river sediment) and non-climatic catchment parameters 
within the Shabelle River and Middle Shabelle region (Jowhar and Balcad) from the existing 
network; 
3.1.2 Set up additional river and rainfall monitoring stations at strategic locations along the river 
and main water outlet points such as primary canals to address current gaps, continuous 
data collection (including discharge measurements) and analysis; 
3.1.3 Modeling of flood and drought exposure and impact over Middle Shabelle region (Jowhar 
and Balcad) (using results from activities 1 & 2 above). These can only be achieved through
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
17 
 
refinement of catchment specific river gauging station flood risk levels/thresholds in turn re-
lying on analysis of rainfall-runoff-discharge, analysis of rainfall-runoff lag periods and re-
finement of river rating curves; 
3.1.4 Future climate scenario modeling i.e., future (2025 to 2055) projections of climate (rainfall 
and temperature) over Shabelle River Catchment. Non-climatic catchment parameters e.g., 
population etc. are implied in the adopted Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). 
3.1.5 Set up and apply recent advances in remote sensing, flood forecasting for the Ethiopian part 
of the Shabelle river basin to forecast flow over the international border. Most floods along 
the Shabelle River originate in the Ethiopian Highlands. 
3.1.6 Developing the flash flood, drainage and topsoil erosion modeling systems for implementa-
tion (linked to Outcome 1) 
3.1.7 Establishing dialogue between the communities, the local government structures, and the 
humanitarian and development actors 
3.1.8 Understanding the early warning mechanisms used at present by the local communities and 
how they can be best adapted/integrated to SWALIM Digniin Early Warning mobile-platform. 
The outcome of the participatory mapping will form the basis from which the scientific 
knowledge will be integrated into, resulting in a capacity development package, tailor made 
for the local communities. This will also enhance the ownership of the solution proposed.  
3.1.9 Risk informed food security and livelihood recommendations for cooperatives, producer 
groups and small-scale producers to create sustainable ecosystems 
3.1.10 Regularly updated information and analysis on seasonal rainfall forecast and performance, 
including on river levels, provided to facilitate decision making – in collaboration with 
SWALIM and FEWS NET/USGS  
Output 3.2:   Operationalized Early Warning System and capacity building to inform prepar-
edness through Anticipatory Action 
3.2.1 Assessment reports on impacts of future climate on floods and drought over Somalia, 
Hirshabelle and community level 
3.2.2 Seasonal Impact Based Forecast system for floods and drought (design and implementation 
at federal and state level) 
3.2.3 Co-design and implementation of Early Warning Systems with local community leaders, 
State (MoHADM) and local government officials and the guidance of the technical working 
groups. 
 
The Early Warning System will integrate the outcomes of the data-driven flood model with the local 
knowledge. This will lead, among others, to the establishment of thresholds of river flow and rainfall 
that will trigger alarms, to the identification of safe locations that the communities will be able to use 
in case of floods, to the identification of procedures that should be adopted by the communities in 
case of emergency. This step includes capacity building for local communities. The system should 
also include feedback mechanism from the local communities on the effectiveness/impacts of the 
EW system for regular (annual) enhancements 
Output 3.3: Community Action Plans for DRR and Anticipatory Action developed and imple-
mented linked to climate change adaptation analysis and Early warning triggers. 
3.3.1 Analysis of climate change scenarios lead to village level identification and planning of dis-
aster risk reduction with NbS (linked to Outcome 1);  
3.3.2 Analysis of environmental hazards and climate scenarios leads to village level scalable an-
ticipatory action plans by community; 
3.3.3 Community Actions Plan co-created by communities and government using DRR plan and 
AA plan linked to early warning triggers; 
3.3.4 Community implementation of risk management NbS on water and natural resources (linked 
to Outcome 1) (WV to discuss how to link CAPs to NbS with UNEP);  
3.3.5 Seasonal early warning monitoring by community linked to FSNAU and SWALIM projections 
and weekly monitoring for flood, drought and pest risk; 
3.3.6 Scalable Anticipatory Action fund established with annual budget for DRR and AA activity 
with disbursement based on early warning triggers; and,
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
18 
 
3.3.7 Community Action Plans consolidated within Hirshaballe Ministry of Disaster Management 
for district level management of flood and drought risk in Jowhar and Balcad. 
 
See Annex 6 on Description of Crisis Modifier for Anticipatory Action. 
Outcome 4:  Enhanced institutional capacity for responsible Governance of Water and land 
resources and infrastructure  
Output 4.1: Capacity building of the federal and state level MoEWR, MoAI and MoECC to es-
tablish the Jowhar Off Stream Program Central Management Organization (JOSP CMO) to 
manage water harvesting, storage and seasonal release for flood risk reduction and irrigation 
users.  
4.1.1 Water resource and irrigation management consultancy engaged. 
4.1.2 Establishing Federal and State levels and line Ministries consultative (steering) group to 
define the scope and role of the JOSP CMO.  
4.1.3 At risk flood communities and irrigation user groups consultation to define scope 
4.1.4 JOSP CMO design document developed for stakeholder review and feedback. 
4.1.5 Review meetings for refinement of JOSP CMO design by stakeholders 
4.1.6 Legal establishment of JOSP CMO with government of Somalia and Hirshabelle State 
4.1.7 Capacity building of JOSP CMO team 
Output 4.2: Alignment and Support to the Government NWRM strategy, international environ-
mental policies and frameworks and relevant Water Sector Coordination Facility Working 
Groups (National Water Coordination Facility)  
4.2.1 JOSP management of water resources provides flood and drought risk reduction and 
drought solutions for Middle and lower Shabelle aligned to the NWCF priorities under 
MoEWR.  
4.2.2 MoEWR to have membership on the JOSP CMO and the NWRM PSC 
4.2.3 Reporting of NWRM progress to MoEWR annually as a contribution to NWCF activities 
4.2.4 Technical guidance notes developed through consultative process with Flood Irrigation WG 
(MoEWR/MoAI and other key stakeholders) on minimum quality standards for flood risk re-
duction infrastructure including integration of NBS 
Output 4.3: NWRM project and investment support FGS to mobilize climate finance.  
4.3.1 Alignment of NWRM design elements to the programming frameworks of GEF, GCF and 
Adaptation Fund 
4.3.2 Identification of relevant climate finance opportunities to support the expansion of NWRM 
scope and/or complimentary to NWRM scope to leverage impact at regional and national 
scale. 
4.3.3 Climate finance consultant engaged to support the development of proposals with MoECC 
to be complimentary to NWRM project. 
4.3.4 Provision of a technical expert to address some of barriers to accessing climate finance 
through the development of specific proposals of climate financing from Adaptation ( GCF & 
GEF). This will support the improved access for climate finance for complimentary projects 
for JOSP on  NEW, NBA  water management, flora and fauna etc. n.  
 
Output 4.4. The food security and nutrition-related technical and organizational capacity of 
key Somali institutions are strengthened at Federal and State levels to enable them to con-
duct food security, nutrition and livelihood assessment, analysis and reporting for policy and 
programme decision-making 
4.4.1 Provide IPC AFI and IPC AMN Level 1 training and SMART methodology for government 
technical staff at FGS and FMS levels 
4.4.2 Provide technical and non-technical support to government technical staff at FGS and FMS 
levels for their participation in seasonal food security and nutrition assessments and subse-
quent IPC analyses
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
19 
 
4.4.3 Provide technical support for the hosting and regularly updating of Early Warning-Early Ac-
tion dashboard on government server 
4.4.4 Provide additional capacity development support to SNBS and other Somali institutions 
based on jointly identified priority gaps 
4.4.5 Provide support for the implementation and mainstreaming of recommendations from the 
Independent IPC Review 
Output 4.5. Timely food security and nutrition information and analysis is developed for early 
warning and early action and emergency response situation across Somalia.   
4.5.1. Regularly updated information and analysis is provided through the early warning-early Ac-
tion dashboard to facilitate decision making  
4.5.2. Regularly updated information and analysis on risk factors related to food security and nutri-
tion provided to facilitate decision making  
4.5.3. Seasonal food security and nutrition assessments are conducted to support decision making  
 
Partnership arrangements: 
  
FAO in collaboration with two UN agencies, UNEP, IOM and an International NGO, World Vision 
International Somalia have partnered to design and implement a sustainable and effective interven-
tion to create a conducive environment for natural and water resources management. The partner-
ship model is based on respective agency mandates, operational presence, experience and capacity 
to effectively deliver on the key objectives of the project. The partnership approach further builds 
upon relationships the partners already have with local communities, leaders, and government rep-
resentatives, and is complemented by other sectoral projects each partner is implementing in the 
area and around the broader JOSP.  
  
FAO as the lead agency will be responsible for the rehabilitation of the Jowhar Off Stream productive 
infrastructure system and climate resilient agriculture for improved production, while  UNEP will de-
sign and deliver ESS solutions as well as to support Nature Based Solutions in and around the 
infrastructure with an emphasis on greening the infrastructure where possible; IOM will roll-out its 
sub-district Community Stabilization Index (COSI) to inform integrated programming designed to re-
build the social contract between communities and local authorities at village level to inform inter-
ventions for displaced populations in the area that take into account localized conflict dynamics; and  
explore nature based durable solutions with regards to land acquisition/tenure issues in relation to 
canal  and reservoir rehabilitation for the RESTORE project. World Vision International Somalia 
(WVS) will leverage on its existing capacity and presence as a long-time actor in Hirshabelle to 
ensure timely and strategic investments aimed at strengthening community action and voice, partic-
ularly through community-led risk awareness raising and contingency planning (Community Action 
and Adaptation Planning (CAAP) to support recovery and resilience efforts for vulnerable groups.  
World Vision is well positioned to support rapid and evidence-based application of the crisis modifier 
to stabilize community resilience gains, protect livelihoods and lives based on community-identified 
resilience priorities. FAO and UNEP shall work closely with government institutions for enhanced 
institutional capacity and governance for sustainable NRM and climate-resilient infrastructure.  
 
Outcome   
Implementing Part-
ner/s   
Outcome 1. Ecosystem and conflict-sensitive approaches 
to Natural Resource Management and Infrastructure re-
habilitation and governance are assessed and applied  
FAO, UNEP, IOM  
Outcome 2: Climate adaptive agro-ecology practices and 
infrastructure promote sustainably enhanced food pro-
duction and environmental health  
FAO
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
20 
 
Outcome 3: Enhanced institutional and community-level 
climate disaster risk profiling and management  
FAO, WVI-S   
Outcome 4:  Enhanced institutional capacity for responsi-
ble Governance of Water and land resources and infra-
structure  
FAO, UNEP   
 
 
 
Inception phase: The project will have a 6-month inception period to allow completion of all prelim-
inaries and critical deliverables to be in place to improve the project design and provide room for 
adaptive programming based on the recommendations from the studies as required. The inception 
phase is also crucial for the establishment of a proper monitoring and evaluation framework, includ-
ing baseline surveys to inform indicator baseline figures and target values required for monitoring 
and measuring programme impact and outcomes. FAO and IOM will also design a dashboard to 
serve as a central data repository and visual platform or interactive interface to show the relationship 
between human activity, the environment and associated risks, for the area covered by planned 
activities in Jowhar and Balcad. The tool will identify, process, analyse and visualise a wide spectrum 
of quantitative, qualitative and GIS data in an interactive way (plugging into new and existing data 
sets) to provide development practitioners with contextual knowledge, support monitoring activities 
and inform programming. The main purpose of the dashboard and its design will be clearly defined 
at inception, but at this stage it is envisaged that the tool will: i) enable cross-agency collaboration 
and intersection of data sets in an automated manner; ii) provide actionable information for strategic 
planning, and iii) showcase the potential impact of water infrastructure investment by tracking out-
come/impact measurement data; iv) as well as acting as a repository for all key project documents 
such as assessment reports. The detailed inception deliverables and whole of programme approach 
are outlined in detail in Annex 5 and in the workplan Annex 4). 
 
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion 
Marginalised individuals or groups are those who are discriminated against, face protection risks, or 
are otherwise excluded or marginalised, either by virtue of their gender, clan affiliation, race, or other 
characteristic. In Somalia, women, minority clans, children, youth, and internally displaced persons 
(IDPs) are considered the most vulnerable groups.  
In that vein, assessments have found women in Somalia have nearly half of the opportunities present 
for men - the gender gap index in Somalia is 0.5614. In 2019, the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) estimated the labour force participation of men (for the age group 15-64) to be 73.6% while 
women’s (for the same the age group 15-64) labour force participation rate was estimated to be 
23.1% with the figures remaining relatively unchanged over the past 10 years.  The main factor that 
fuels gender inequality in Somalia is socio-cultural traditions, norms and practices that inhibit mean-
ingful participation of women in production, political forums and in economic opportunities. These 
barriers are deeply entrenched and upheld by traditional community structures, which fail to be chal-
lenged due to a lack of adequate policy regulatory environment to punish, or forbid certain harmful 
practices such as child marriages, Female Genital Mutilation, restriction on girls’ education, etc.  
Agriculture remains the biggest employer for both men and women, with men and women represent-
ing 79.2% and 83.9% of the labour force, respectively. Although more recently women have in-
creased economic opportunities, they still often forced to work in menial positions often making 
barely enough money to sustain themselves and their families.  Gender Equality and women em-
powerment (GEWE) is intrinsic to the work of UN and FAO. Participating partners shall seek to sys-
tematically integrate gender in this project by conducting a gender analysis that seeks to understand 
the challenges and opportunities to ensuring active participation of women in the project. Gender will 
be integrated across all activities and reported on at the outcome level. A three-pronged strategy will 
guide gender integration into the project as follows:
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
21 
 
i. Direct interventions to enhance representation and active participation of women in all pro-
ject activities;  
ii. Integration of gender equality concerns in all capacity building activities.  
iii. Collection of sex-disaggregated data for both qualitative and quantitative assessments, in-
corporating the use of thematic analysis to inform gender-sensitive interventions/ adaptive 
programming.   
In this project, using a rights-based approach to supporting gender equality, project shall work closely 
with all stakeholders to support the following gender-specific objectives:   
- 
Women and men have equal voice and decision-making power in rural institutions and or-
ganizations to shape relevant legal frameworks, policies and programmes;  
- 
Women and men have equal rights, access to, and control over natural and productive re-
sources, to contribute to and benefit from sustainable agriculture and rural development;  
- 
Women and men have equal rights and access to services, markets and decent work and 
equal control over the resulting income and benefits;  
- 
Women's work burden is reduced by enhancing their access to technologies, practises and 
infrastructure and by promoting an equitable distribution of responsibilities, including at 
household level.   
 
FAO as lead agency and partners recognize that gender inequality is a root cause of many factors 
that limit the full potential of the sustainable development of agri-food systems, and as such will 
identify pathways to promote equal participation of women and men in the project. Affirmative action 
will be taken to address inequality and to support women to fully participate in the project and gain 
maximum gains from resources provided. In that case, a gender action plan for the project will be 
developed once the gender analysis report is available.   
 
Conflict Sensitivity  
Complex inter- and intra-clan violence in the district is deeply rooted in resource scarcity (e.g., agri-
cultural land usage, water and grazing rights) and sometimes results in violent clashes among the 
clans and subclans over both political and territorial control. The presence of the Shabelle river cre-
ates a highly sought after resource in both Jowhar and Balcad by both pastoralists and farmers21. 
The Shiidle (sub clan for Somali Bantu) are considered the Guuri (original settlers) while the other 
Hawiye sub clans such as Abgaal, Hawadle and Gaaljecel are considered Galti (new settlers) in 
Jowhar District.  The conflict between farmers and pastoralists is one of the oldest and recurrent 
conflicts in Jowhar district. Pastoralists who are mainly from the dominant Hawiye sub-clans of Abgal 
and Gaaljecel regard the Shabelle River and pasture along the river as a natural resource that no 
one should claim ownership over. Jowhar District is also home to inter-clan conflict over power shar-
ing. The perceived marginalization of Shidle, a sub-clan of Somali Bantu, and implementation of the 
4.5 power sharing system has also reignited old residual conflicts. The overall security situation in 
Jowhar district is fragile with government and state authority limited to only urban areas. AS contin-
ues to control large swaths of village settlements on the outskirts of Jowhar and the main roads 
connecting the state to Mogadishu.  
Conflict Sensitivity will be embedded at 3 levels within the JOSP: 
JOSP level conflict dynamic analysis & scenario planning: Funded by USAID TRANSFORM, IOM 
will undertake Durable Solutions and conflict mitigation analysis and plan development with GIST 
consultancy firm. Part of this analysis will research the conflict dynamics in Jowhar and Balcad district 
in the communities around the JOSP infrastructure. This analysis will inform which stakeholder 
groups are in conflict, the level of this conflict and how this may affect JOSP programming.   Scenar-
ios for possible escalation and recommendations for mitigation of conflict will be developed in the 
study. The analysis will take place during inception phase, and recommendations be made to the 
PSC for program design refinement to be conflict sensitive and ideally use JOSP programming to 
promote conflict mitigation.  
 
21 GIST, 2023. Task 44 - Inception and Preliminary Analysis.
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
22 
 
Community level Conflict analysis and NRM planning: Each community located around the JOSP 
reservoir will be targeted by the RESTORE project for community level conflict analysis and Do No 
Harm planning.  This will include application of a NRM lens to establish how access and use of water 
and land are a source of tension between stakeholder groups. Once this analysis is done, a Do No 
Harm approach will be used to inform Community Action Plan elements on NRM that promote in-
crease availability and equitable access to water and land resources for all stakeholders. Included 
in this plan will be dispute resolution mechanisms at community level to reduce the likelihood of 
conflict, and the process to escalate to the local government for inter-community disputes.  This 
approach will also be applied to the 90HHs from the 7 villages with Durable Solutions needs.  The 
likelihood of conflict over access to and use of natural resources between IDPs and Host communi-
ties is a risk to be mitigated.  Tensions over land tenure, land use and irrigation water access will 
likely to be present between IDPs and Hosts communities, especially if they are from different clan 
bases.  The JOSP programming will identify the underlying tension and conflict risk around these 
resource use between stakeholders and co-create community action plans for joint use and man-
agement to reduce risk of conflict.  These plans will be implemented as part of the RESTORE project, 
and possibly scaled up with other funding from donors such as the Peace Building Fund.  Similar 
PBF funded community peace building approaches have been used by IOM & FAO in other conflict 
prone riverine contexts successfully and learning from these projects will be applied and scaled in 
the JOSP programming. 
Context monitoring and program adaptation: Following on from the context analysis and scenario 
planning that will be undertaken in the inception phase, the JOSP program will monitor key conflict 
indicators in Jowhar and Balcad. This will provide early warning of increasing clan tensions that 
enable the program implementation use to proactively adjust activity implementation and modalities, 
as well as maintain higher level community dialogue to reduce the likelihood of disruption to JOSP 
programming.  This approach has been used successfully by FAO in Beledweyne to mitigate different 
clan tensions in flood mitigation projects.  In the event of significant deterioration in the security 
situation in the operational context, the conflict trend monitoring will be useful for the PSC to deter-
mine program redesign options for following phases.  
 
IOM will lead in ensuring all actions are designed and implemented in a conflict-sensitive manner 
informing preventative actions where needed. The first activity will be to develop a conflict analysis 
and a dashboard that can be updated by all staff in the project. Having a clear picture of the situa-
tion and a point where every partner in this project can turn to monitor latest conflict incidents. The 
Programme team, Support team and the different partners will be sensitized on specific risk factors 
and vulnerabilities and to ensure conflict sensitivity approaches are mainstreamed with CS tools to 
be used by the programme management and monitoring teams in order to facilitate mainstreaming 
into the programme. Project teams will also be working with community dialogue processes and 
natural resource management coordination mechanisms that will potentially decrease communal-
level conflict or negative perceptions. 
 
Table 1. Conflict parties in Jowhar 
 
Village/ 
Community 
Rural/ 
Urban 
Clans 
Minority-clan 
Hanti-Wadaag 
Urban 
Shiidle sub-clan of Somali Bantu 
Abgaal sub-clan of Hawiye 
Hawadle sub-clan of Hawiye 
Shiidle (sub-clan of so-
mali Bantu) 
Dheymasama 
Rural 
Abgaal sub-clan of Hawiye 
Gaaljecel sub-clan of Hawiye 
Hawadle sub-clan of Hawiye 
  
Mandhere 
Rural 
Abgaal sub-clan of Hawiye 
Gaaljecel sub-clan of Hawiye
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
23 
 
Hawadle sub-clan of Hawiye 
Congo 
Rural 
Abgaal sub-clan of Hawiye 
Gaaljecel sub-clan of Hawiye  
Hawadle sub-clan of Hawiye 
Eyle sub-clan of Somali Bantu 
Reer Shabelle sub-clan of Somali 
Bantu 
Eyle sub-clan of Somali 
Bantu  
  
Reer Shabelle sub-clan 
of Somali Bantu 
 
 
 
Coordination and programme synergies  
While the proposed FCDO-funded project is stand-alone - having its own outcomes that are inde-
pendent from other projects - it is also part of a broader Programme of work developed in collabora-
tion with the Government and other UN Partners. As previously mentioned, this Programme is known 
as JOSP or Jowhar Offstream Storage Project and refers to the entire infrastructure system rehabil-
itation (see map in Annex 1) consisting of 5 main components, as well as a series of complementary 
actions to be supported by other actors. The main infrastructure or hardware components include: 
1) the Sabuun Barrage; 2) Middle Shabelle Flood Risk Reduction infrastructure; 3) the Supply Canal; 
4) the Jowhar Reservoir; 5) the Outlet Canal. Additional activities under the JOSP Programme are 
split across five other main areas of work known as ‘Streams’, outlined below and further detailed in 
Annex 6. 
Table 2 - JOSP Streams and their focus areas 
Stream  Core Component/s  Partner/s  
Focus Area  
1  
Productive Infrastruc-
ture Development  
FAO  
Rehabilitation of the Jowhar Offstream productive in-
frastructure system to mitigate flood, drought and 
provide sustainable access to water for an estimated 
1.5million people as well as other related market in-
frastructure  
2  
Inclusive & Sustaina-
ble NRM  
FAO, UNEP Ensure all works apply ecosystem approaches for 
the sustainable and inclusive exploitation of the natu-
ral resource environment including the implementa-
tion of nature-based solutions & watershed manage-
ment  
3  
Climate smart pro-
duction, Private Pub-
lic Partnerships & 
value chain develop-
ment  
FAO, 
UNIDO  
Get people back into production in a sustainable 
manner that takes into account the increasing cli-
mate volatility and provide linkages to markets and 
business development opportunities  
4  
DSS, land tenure & 
Social inclusion  
FAO, IOM, 
UN Habitat  
Localized analysis of conflict dynamics and needs 
with the creation of solution pathways for displaced 
populations including land dispute resolution and 
promotion of social cohesion and stabilization in tar-
get communities  
5  
Effective & Account-
able Governance  
All Part-
ners  
Institutional capacity development at all levels (Fed-
eral, State, Local) and community support for en-
hanced sustainability and ownership and manage-
ment of project outcomes & services  
 
USAID and FCDO interventions will be relatively independent one from the other, especially in the 
phase of rehabilitation works. It is possible to rehabilitate, for example, the Sabuun barrage and the 
reservoir embankments in a fairly independent way. Also, once the Supply canal will be rehabilitated 
it doesn't mean that it has to be immediately connected with the reservoir if that is not ready to be
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
24 
 
filled. Dedicated and temporary operational rule for the supply canal gates, at the intake of the canal, 
can be designed to avoid overflowing inside the reservoir. The outlet canal can also be rehabilitated, 
and the gates left open so that water flows directly back to Shabelle river and does not overflow the 
reservoir.  
  
Table 3- The critical linkages between components USAID TRANSFORM & FDCO RESTORE   
 
Component 
Purpose 
Dependencies 
Year 
Donor 
Sabuun Bar-
rage 
Regulates Shabelle river 
level and divert flood wa-
ter into JOSP system 
Links to Supply Canal 
One  
USAID 
TRANS-
FORM 
Supply Canal 
Conveys flood water into 
JOSP Reservoir for use 
for irrigation in Middle and 
Lower Shabelle 
Supplied by Sabuun 
Barrage, and links to 
JOSP Reservoir.  Du-
rable Solutions for 7 
villages to be in place 
before rehabilitation is 
completed.  
Two 
  
USAID 
TRANS-
FORM 
JOSP Reser-
voir 
Storage of flood water for 
irrigation use and eco-
system services to Middle 
and Lower Shabelle 
Supplied by Supply 
Canal and linked to 
Outlet Canal. 
Durable Solutions for 
7 villages to be in 
place before rehabili-
tation is completed. 
Two 
FCDO 
RESTORE 
Outlet Canal 
Conveys irrigation water 
from JOSP Reservoir to 
Shabelle River for use 
downstream by irrigation 
schemes in Middle and 
Lower Shabelle.  
Supplied by JOSP 
Reservoir and links to 
Shabelle River.  
Two 
USAID 
TRANS-
FORM 
JOSP Govern-
ance 
Ensure governance ca-
pacity to delivery flood 
and irrigation manage-
ment and the sustainable 
operations and mainte-
nance of JOSP infrastruc-
ture   
Supply canal, reser-
voir and outlet canal 
will not start rehabili-
tation until there is 
government agree-
ment on JOSP CMO 
formation.  
One 
FCDO  
RESTORE 
 
The FCDO contribution under RESTORE provides a substantial tranche of funding of USD 42 million 
to activities within Stream 1: Productive Infrastructure Rehabilitation, to support the rehabilitation of 
the Reservoir. As well as Stream 2: Inclusive and Sustainable NRM where it supports baseline infor-
mation and monitoring on climate, soil, water, vegetation and land cover, NRM and NBS approaches 
to reservoir rehabilitation and enhancement and improved natural resource governance. It also sup-
ports activities under Stream 3: Climate Smart Production and Value Chain Development promoting 
agro-ecology approaches to production for enhanced, climate resilient agri-food systems. And 
Stream 5: Effective and Accountable Governance with FCDO contributing to the establishment of 
robust governance mechanisms to support infrastructure and resource governance within the project 
as well as setting up sustainable systems to endure beyond its lifespan. The JOSP programming will 
be managed in two groups of projects, being Core (FCDO RESTORE, USAID TRANSFORM and 
Somalia Joint Fund) and Complimentary (Peace Building Fund, Denmark Durable Solutions and EU 
Climate Security.  The Core programming will be under the management of the JOSP Implementa-
tion Unit, whereas the Complimentary programming will be under individual agency management.
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
25 
 
This keeps the implementation focus of JOSP on delivering the Core projects scope, which ensuring 
strong linkage to complimentary projects that leverage and contribute to the impact of JOSP pro-
gramming. Programming integration of the complimentary projects plans and implementation is en-
sured by having the project managers and lead government ministries of these projects as members 
of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG). The donors and government line ministries for these com-
plimentary projects will also be members of the JOSP Steering Committee to ensure strategic align-
ment of programming outcomes and proactively addressing future programming gaps.  The total 
programme value of Core and Complimentary programming is estimated at USD 105 millions of this, 
FAO estimates the total cost of restoring functionality to the system (infrastructure only) is approxi-
mately USD 42 million with final costs to be confirmed following the update of the 2015 Mott Mac-
Donald Study. See also Programme Governance and Consortium Management Diagrams in 
Annexes. 
 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning  
FAO, IOM, UNEP and WVIS Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Units will work closely with 
project implementation teams, and partners to conduct all monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities 
for the project with an aim of measuring the achievements under each outcome. In carrying out the 
M&E activities, to measure the impact and outcomes on an annual basis, FAO, IOM, UNEP and 
WVS proposes to employ a three-pronged approach, that is, secondary data review, quantitative 
(household interviews) and qualitative methods (Focus Group Discussions-FGDs and Key Informant 
Interviews).  
UNEP M&E proposes to use a soil monitoring and eco-systems evaluation approach which regularly 
monitors the health of the soil and the ecosystems and in doing so measure throughout the lifecycle 
of the project how we are meeting the targets set out at the beginning. Records of damage after an 
extreme event, before the intervention was implemented (i.e. the baseline) Data collection after an 
extreme event, when the intervention was implemented (ideally in areas with/ without intervention. 
FAO M&E proposes the use of a lighter version of the Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis 
(RIMA) quantitative approach as the main MEL approach plus additional modules of the project’s 
interest. This methodology systematically explores the relationship between a core set of context-
specific variables of resilience to construct the resilience capacity index (RCI) based on the four 
pillars of resilience (assets, social safety nets, adaptive capacity and access to basic services). The 
approach will utilize the short RIMA tool and will incorporate other modules of interest to assess the 
impact of the intervention. The RIMA methodology will assist in assessing the impact of the project 
on household’s resilience, testing the theory of change and assessing main outcome indicators of 
the project. Moreover, RCI provide useful reference information for supporting targeting decisions, 
identifying the specific weaknesses (or negative coping mechanisms) that increase vulnerability and 
the contribution of each pillar to household resilience capacity. In addition, key food security indica-
tors including Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), Food Consumption Score (FCS) and Re-
duced Coping Strategy Index (rCSI) will be measured. To complement the RIMA tool. FAO shall also 
use the Self-evaluation and Holistic Assessment of climate Resilience of farmers and Pastoralists 
(SHARP) tool designed specifically for climate resilience indicators such as ICF KPI 1. 
(https://www.fao.org/in-action/sharp/sharp-tool) .  
MEL activities will include the following: i) A baseline study will be conducted during the inception 
phase of the project to determine baseline values for target indicators in the Results Framework; ii) 
Routine process monitoring, and post distribution monitoring will be conducted by the MEL unit to 
review the status and completeness of the infrastructures. Process monitoring will be important in 
analyzing progress towards achievement of project outcomes and will be a critical juncture at which 
adaptive programming will be done; ii) Soil health and Crop field yield assessments to estimate yields 
for selected crops and soil health; iv) midline assessment will be conducted halfway the project to 
track the achievements of the project and; v) An end line impact assessment will be conducted after 
the completion of the project activities. It will seek to measure progress and success against target 
outcome indicators set during the baseline, as well as draw lessons and recommendations from the
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
26 
 
project. All the studies will include a gender lens that will be critical in informing on appropriateness 
of modalities employed.     
A detailed project monitoring and evaluation framework will be prepared at the inception phase, in-
cluding proxy indicators that will be useful in monitoring the effectiveness and efficiency of processes 
and implementation approaches used. Besides the monitoring activities mentioned above, the pro-
ject team shall regularly monitor the delivery of the project using project management tools. These 
will enable them to collect real-time information, identify positive and negative unintended outcomes 
of the project, information that will be useful to inform the review of project delivery approaches for 
adaptive programming.  
  
To ensure adaptive programming, learning on an annual basis will be embedded as an integral part 
of the programme approach, not only within each of the respective agencies but across the consor-
tium. Adopting a Collaborate, Learning and Adaptation (CLA) approach, the project will identify learn-
ing needs, provide regular and varied opportunities to reflect, and create feedback loops into the 
project management process. During the inception phase a learning agenda will be refined through 
collaborative process working within and across organizations to identify learning questions and 
identify evidence gaps. Once established, the learning agenda will then be embedded into the M&E 
system and working practices, notably the baseline, midterm, and final evaluations. In parallel to the 
evaluations the project will undertake action research. This will entail collaborating with researchers 
or experts to conduct research studies, pilot interventions, or experimental approaches that contrib-
ute to the project's learning objectives. While, at the same time drawing from established M&E mech-
anisms for collecting feedback from stakeholders such as TPM, surveys, interviews, focus groups, 
and suggestion boxes there will be regular reflections points established.  
Aligned with this, and supported by the FAO learning team, the project will identify and employ vari-
ous opportunities for reflection and learning such as learning exchanges. These will be facilitated, 
allowing project staff, partners, and beneficiaries to visit and learn from other organizations or pro-
jects with similar initiatives. They will provide opportunities for knowledge sharing and the adoption 
of best practices. Also, sense-making and reflection workshops or learning circles will also be orga-
nized at regular intervals, creating dedicated spaces for stakeholders to reflect on experiences, share 
lessons learned, and identify areas for improvement. After-action reviews (AARs) or project retro-
spectives will be conducted at key milestones or at the conclusion of significant project activities. 
These structured discussions among project team members and stakeholders will identify suc-
cesses, challenges, and areas for improvement. Dedicated resources will be allocated for organizing 
AARs, facilitating discussions, and documenting lessons learned. Knowledge sharing events, such 
as conferences, seminars, or webinars, will be organized to disseminate project findings, lessons 
learned, and best practices to a wider audience. To foster ongoing learning and collaboration, com-
munities of practice (CoPs) will be established around specific thematic areas or sectors relevant to 
the project. Engaging external experts or consultants with specialized knowledge and experience 
will contribute to the learning process.  
These activities will be integrated throughout the project cycle, fostering a continuous and iterative 
learning process. Closing the loop involves acknowledging, analyzing, and taking action based on 
the feedback received, promoting transparency and accountability. 
Proposed learning questions: 
Impact Level: 
1. To what extent has the project contributed to reducing the vulnerability of the target population to 
climate hazards such as floods and droughts? 
2. How has the project supported and advanced the environmental peacebuilding agenda in Soma-
lia? 
Outcome Level:
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
27 
 
1. How effective are the ecosystem and conflict-sensitive approaches to natural resource manage-
ment and infrastructure rehabilitation and governance in promoting sustainable development? 
2. To what extent have climate adaptive agro-ecology practices and infrastructure enhancements 
resulted in improved food production and environmental health? 
 Output Level: 
1. What are the key lessons learned from the restoration and sustainable management of reservoirs 
for flood and drought resilience? 
2. How have the community-level action plans for disaster risk reduction (DRR) and anticipatory 
action contributed to climate change adaptation and resilience building? 
The studies’ data collection will employ a mixed approach where FAO and UNEP Field Analysts and 
third-party monitoring will be used. The use of the third-party monitors enables access to all project 
areas, especially where security challenges may restrict FAO/UNEP access. 
In addition to the above-mentioned project specific monitoring and evaluation, under the JOSP Pro-
gramme, FAO’s SWALIM and UNEP DHI systems will support monitoring of impact and outcome 
level indicators with interventions such as: i) The creation of a detailed baseline for the JOSP 
area of influence (Middle and Lower Shabelle). This activity will be crucial to be able to measure 
the impact, in an objective way, of the improved water availability and water management in the food 
system. This baseline will include a detailed land cover mapping using very high-resolution images 
to ascertain number of plants per square unit and quantify the increased food production; ii) Im-
proved water resource monitoring. As of now there is only one river gauge in Jowhar. In order to 
be able to measure the amount of water abstracted by the JOSP area, the amount of water flowing 
in the river upstream, and downstream of the JOSP must be measured. FAO proposes to install two 
new river gauges (one upstream in Mahadday Weyne, and one downstream in Balcad), and to have 
gauge readers in both locations. In addition, the volumes of water in the main canal and in the most 
important primary canals must be measured. The canal water monitoring will also serve to eventually 
inform the design of a fee structure for the water users. UNEP DHI will also be using its international 
systems to monitor flow rate transboundary as well its flash flood modelling it implemented under the 
previous project. Furthermore, SWALIM will monitor by means of automated remote sensing analy-
sis, the amount of water in the reservoir and the status of vegetation in the command area; and iii) 
Crop monitoring for regular monitoring of crops and infrastructure stability and maintenance needs. 
Drones will be equipped with both a LiDAR sensor and a camera. The combination of the two sensors 
is optimal for monitoring crop growth (sensing the height of the plants and therefore their vegetative 
status) and for monitoring infrastructure by means of both elevation dataset (provided by LiDAR) and 
images (provided by the camera). This activity can only be implemented with a strong component of 
capacity building of the local authorities and local communities. Institutional capacity building will be 
attached to all these activities.  
These programme level monitoring activities be complemented by additional resources from other 
resource partners.  
Grievance Mechanism  
FAO Somalia has established formal feedback systems for its beneficiary communities, in line with 
complaints under the Accountability to Affected Populations framework.  
These feedback systems include:  
i. 
A Call Centre  
ii. 
A complaints Hotline (number communicated and displayed at project sites where security  
allows, on relevant distribution materials, and verbally communicated to beneficiaries, com-
munity groups and local authorities throughout the project.)  
iii. 
Systematic Communication and Sensitization of local communities through NGOs, radio 
campaigns, and ad-hoc Call Centre exercises  
iv. 
Third Party Monitoring  
v. 
FAO Field Monitors reports  
vi. 
FAO Field monitoring survey tools
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
28 
 
vii. 
Emails and letters from Elders, Council Members, district authorities, beneficiaries, tractor 
owners, pump owners and agro dealers  
viii. 
Common Feedback Project/Radio Ergo  
ix. 
Monitoring by donor institutions.  
   
To enable effective and efficient management of feedback and complaints, FAO and partners will:   
(i) 
Communicate accountability commitments to the affected population, including their rights to 
complain as and when needed;  
(ii) 
Actively seeks beneficiary feedback, and reviews efficiency of its feedback systems; 
(iii) 
Assesses beneficiaries, trains Field Monitors, Call Centre and Hotline staff on handling ben-
eficiary feedback and complaints;  
(iv) 
Systematically documents all feedback and identifies trends in beneficiary complaints;  
(v) 
Creates response mechanisms for complaints;  
(vi) 
Reports and takes action on feedback, complaints and allegations received through the Com-
pliance Unit, technical teams and management, Office of Inspector General or Ethics Office.  
 
All grievance and feedback tools used in FAO are accessible to a high number of beneficiaries in-
cluding women and minority clans, but also elders, and council members across Somalia. While the 
Call Centre focuses on outgoing voice calls to communicate with and to survey beneficiary commu-
nities, the Hotline (a toll-free telephone service) receives inbound voice calls from the communities 
for specific inquiries and complaints. Through the toll-free Hotline, FAO receives inquiries, requests 
for new assistance and other feedback and complaints on its programmes directly from beneficiaries. 
FAO consults internally with the different sector leads (agriculture, fisheries, livestock, cash transfers, 
etc.) and always contacts the originator of the feedback so that the issue can be understood, and 
the callers are always kept up-to-date on progress on their issue or request. The Hotline number is 
communicated via live radio broadcasts, face-to-face information sessions, leaflets, Call Centre and 
FAO vouchers. Most of the calls received by the Hotline relate to queries or complaints on entitle-
ments and requests Project (CFP) initiated by the Humanitarian Country Team of Somalia. Radio 
Ergo broadcasts daily information on humanitarian issues all across Somalia, and under the CFP it 
receives feedback and complaints from auditors, and reports these confidentially through OCHA to 
the sector Clusters. FAO is constantly improving its diverse channels of communication with benefi-
ciaries to ensure that feedback is collected in a confidential manner, and responses provided to 
beneficiaries in a timely and satisfactory manner. 
 
Stakeholder Engagement  
The project has been developed in close consultation with representatives of the Government’s tech-
nical and extension departments and, relevant partners to ensure that their views are taken into 
consideration. The project will develop a detailed stakeholder engagement plan during the inception 
phase including planned consultation with government primarily MoAI & MoEWR, irrigation farmer 
groups and potential private sector operators at federal and state level to define the scope of JOSP 
Central Management Organization (planned from year 1 of the project).   
This will inform the creation of the Irrigation Committee, which will be the user group body to repre-
sent the interests of irrigation farmers using JOSP water, and act as the key entity in cost recovery 
for these services from irrigation farmers. The rehabilitation of key productive infrastructure of the 
supply canal, reservoir and outlet canal will not be completed until there is an agreement from federal 
and state governments to create the JOSP CMO, and a detailed plan for the legal establishment and 
implementation of CMO in Year 2.   
More specifically, water governance support will focus on strengthening the capacity of water man-
agement committees and sub-committees to manage water access, regulate use and sustain canal 
maintenance. More in-depth stakeholder consultations will take place during the project inception 
phase to further inform and ground-truth the project’s design, implementation modalities and other 
key parameters. The inception phase will also prioritize engagement with smallholder farmers to 
define the challenges they face in production, water access and market access. These meetings 
informed the operational detail of the project, in order to fine-tune the support farmer groups will
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
29 
 
provide to individual smallholder farmers and how to ensure inclusive membership. These meetings 
sensitized local communities on the community-based grant modalities and production planning. 
 
 
 
Budget, Finance (see Budget in excel Annex 2) 
 
Value for money  
 
Statement 1: JOSP is expected to create climate security around the access and provision for water 
and for land ecosystems in the command area. Building resilience to climate change and the shocks 
that are becoming cyclical in nature. Based on evidence of flash flood reduction and the previous 
FCDO nature-based solutions approach, it is estimated that we can reduce flooding impacts by at 
least 50% over the next 5 years. The project will analyze and implement the water modeling done 
under the previous FAO-UNEP FCDO-funded project.  
 
Statement 2: JOSP is expected to substantially reduce acute food insecurity in the region/s saving 
an estimated USD36million per year in food/cash related assistance to IPC 3+ populations. This is 
based on a 5yr average of an IPC3+ caseload across the target districts of 165,253 people 
(27,542HHs) using a CBT cost of USD110/HH/mth with an estimated cost requirement for assistance 
of USD36million per year for the target districts. 
 
Statement 3: Under JOSP, farmers with restored access to irrigation will produce enough food to 
feed their families for 12 months and generate surplus for sale. This surplus is expected to provide 
income for families to meet additional needs such as healthcare, education and re-investment into 
production. The additional food surplus will increase local food availability decreasing the need for 
importation of cereals and thus helping to ensure affordability. The additional income generated by 
producers is expected to have knock on effects for the local economy boosting local development. 
Below figures represent estimates based on current available data and are subject to change once 
detailed baseline data has been collected. In particular, the land cover baseline planned under the 
programme will be critical for informing impact measurement in terms of land under cultivation and 
yield, while household economy data will be critical for informing household income, use and bene-
fits. 
 
JOSP impact for Maize 
  
  
Parameter 
  
values
Units 
Total Ha cultivated (considering 92% of land 
only) 
              487,976  
Ha 
Total harvest considering yield of 2Mt/ha 
              975,953  
Mt 
30% post-harvest losses 
              292,786  
Mt 
Total harvest after post-harvest losses (2Mt-
30%) 
              683,167  
Mt 
Value of total harvest for 1 season  (300 
usd/tonn) 
       204,950,038  
USD 
 
  
  
  
Actual value of production, per season 
         51,237,509  
USD 
Added $ value of cereal production in % (JOSP), 
per season 
             300% 
                                   % 
Added Mt of production thanks to JOSP, per 
season 
              512,375  
Mt
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
30 
 
Added Mt per capita (average, of pop in gravity 
irr), per season 
                    1.39  
Mt 
Added value per capita, per season 
                     417  
USD 
 
Statement 4: FAO’s experience demonstrates that where water is restored, equitably managed and 
governed, the risk of resource-based conflict is reduced. FAO expects that as a result of government-
managed reliable access to irrigation armed non-state actors will be less able to leverage resources 
such as water in order to gain control over local populations. Furthermore, the income and livelihood 
opportunities generated as a result of the programme are expected to intentionally engage youth at-
risk of radicalization, reducing the likelihood of recruitment into armed groups as an income source.  
 
FAO ensures the highest value for money in infrastructure rehabilitation by using tender evaluation 
process for technical capacity and commercial offer.  Bidders on infrastructure works will be evalu-
ated on their technical capacity, demonstrated works of similar type and value, and access to these 
locations. This will result in the contractors being ranked from highest to lowest in terms of technical 
evaluation scoring.  Following this process, the contractor commercial offers are separately ranked 
from the highest to lowest, with scoring. These scores are then combined to select the contractors 
with the highest technical capacity with the most competitive offer in the evaluation process.  This 
ensures value for money is inbuilt to the supply of infrastructure rehabilitation works.  
 
Programme Risk  
 
Below is a brief outline of key risks and mitigation measures (see Risk Matrix in Annex 3 for additional 
information). 
 
Lack of political buy-in or stakeholder engagement at FGS/FMS level 
 
During year one of the project, during a rigorous inception phase partners will work with MoEWR, 
MoAI and MoECC to define the detailed scope of work for each ministry and capacity building targets. 
These will be at federal and state levels. The line ministries will have clear roles in part of the imple-
mentation and governance of the project. These roles will be exercised in the Steering Committee 
and Technical working group levels. In addition, focal points from these ministries will join the tech-
nical unit to work with FAO, IOM & UNEP as part of the implementation of the project. These steps 
build the role of government into the design, planning, implementation of the project to ensure buy-
in. 
 
Inadequate local governance and resource management structures resulting in conflict or 
lack of access to resources for the most vulnerable 
 
The JOSP central management organization (CMO) will be established following a rigorous stake-
holder engagement process at federal and state level with government and user groups. This will be 
undertaken by experience water governance consultant with the MoEWR and MoAI over year one. 
This group will have clear constitution and bylaws established with government chairpersonship. The 
JOSP CMO will have capacity building from years 2 – 5 of the project to ensure it has the manage-
ment and technical staff required to ensure ongoing operation and maintenance of the infrastructure.    
The JOSP CMO will engage a private sector operator to ensure the day-to-day operations and sea-
sonal maintenance of the infrastructure. The project will provide capacity building to this service 
provider to ensure they can deliver services to quality standards. The service provider will be respon-
sible for collecting fees for water access from irrigation users. This will be from the peak irrigation 
user group that represents the command areas serviced by the JOSP. This cost recovery for irriga-
tion water access will be used by the JOSP CMO to ensure that ongoing maintenance of the infra-
structure.
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
31 
 
Inadequate provision for Durable Solutions for IDPs at risk of displacement 
 
IOM has been engaged to undertake an assessment and develop durable solutions plan for IDP 
communities within and around the reservoir area, as part of the USAID funded TRANSFORM pro-
ject. IOM has secured funding from government of Denmark to provide durable solutions for these 
communities in locations that will not be flooded by the reservoir restoration. Community engagement 
will focus on the inter and intra clan grievances (primarily Abgaal and Shiidle) and the host/IDP/re-
turnee dynamics that are linked to property and land disputes. The EU-funded project, Climate-Adap-
tive Stabilization in Somalia will also be oriented towards the newly recovered zones of the JOSP 
command area, focusing on access to water and housing, land and property (HLP) priorities of com-
munities. IOM’s Durable Solutions Unit and CCCM will update data and satellite imagery on all set-
tlements and develop relocation options accordingly. In addition, IOM and FAO are designing an 
initiative to facilitate participatory and inclusive cadastral mapping throughout the JOSP command 
area funded by the Peace Building Fund (PBF). A durable solution for the 7 villages that have been 
identified as being at high risk of flooding within reservoir area must be agreed and implementation 
should commence before the end of year two of the JOSP program if the years 3 – 5 programming 
is to continue as per the planned schedule.  
 
Delays in construction timelines impact on integration and phasing of deliverables in the pro-
gramming streams 
The construction timelines for the key infrastructure and how these link to each other are outlined in 
annex 5 on JOSP deliverables and dependencies. The major water management infrastructure for 
flood and irrigation will be rehabilitated between year one and two.  In year one, USAID TRANS-
FORM will rehabilitate the Sabuun barrage, while FCDO will address embankments that cause flood-
ing on the south side of the reservoir. In year two, the rehabilitation of the supply canal, reservoir and 
outlet canal, will be dependent on agreement with government and communities on durable solutions 
for the 7 villages within the reservoir and JOSP governance plan including creation of the JOSP 
Central Management Organization.   If these key milestones are not met by end of year one, then 
the rehabilitation of these major infrastructure components in year two will be delayed until these 
plans and agreement are in place.   This is to ensure that government and communities have full 
buy-in in the durable solutions and JOSP governance before the programming continues in years 
two - five.   
  
 
Deterioration of the security environment and/or change in access to project sites 
 
Partners will monitor closely any developments in the security situation at the project locations as 
well as at national level that can impact project outcomes and/or access to sites for contractors and 
project staff. In the event of a substantial deterioration of the security and operating environment 
(including in the eventuality of an ATMIS draw down in the area), partners will work closely with 
FCDO as well as UNDSS/UNSOM and relevant fora at national level including government to identify 
solutions and assess the impact on project objectives. The project team will liaise also via UNSOM 
with key stakeholders such as the Somali National Army, local security forces, and local government. 
Should security and access result in extensive delays or extended inoperability the project team will 
consider reprogramming in consultation with FCDO. 
 
 
Communication plan 
The project will follow all relevant guidance of the FCDO for the implementation of visibility and com-
munication activities. All assets and materials of the project will contain FCDO logos and the Ac-
countability to Affected Populations strategy will ensure that all participants are fully aware of the 
funding source for the services and goods received.  The project communication and visibility strat-
egy will be developed in detail by FAO’s Communication Unit and agreed with all participating part-
ners. The plan shall include key messages, target audiences and a costed work plan with clear
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
32 
 
indicators to monitor the achievement of communication objectives. This strategy will be informed by 
the FCDO’s communication and visibility guidelines as well as UN communication policy guide-
lines. As noted by the response actors, there has been insufficient visibility and communication ma-
terials in the local languages, leading to limited knowledge of response activities amongst govern-
ment and civil society partners. The communication strategy will specifically address this shortfall by 
incorporating specific messaging in Somali and Arabic languages and translations of all materials.   
 
Capacity and management  
 
In the initial period of the RESTORE project a Central Management Organization (CMO) is proposed 
for the JOSP, to ensure operation during floods and release of water during the subsequent irrigation 
season, and for maintenance of all canals and structures. It will also be responsible for maintenance 
of the river channel and banks and to maintain drainage. The CMO will coordinate with the existing 
canal committees who will agree abstraction rules for the JOSP management and service provision, 
coordinate canal operation with releases from the JOSP, inform users of timing of irrigation and to 
manage irrigation within individual command areas.  
 
Governance capacity building for the JOSP CMO will begin in year 1 of the project and other com-
plimentary projects funded by other donors. The first year will focus on scoping the governance sys-
tem for the JOSP CMO with irrigation and governance consultancy working closely with Federal and 
Hirshabelle and South West State governments.  This will focus on MoAI, MoEWR & MoECC as key 
line ministries for water management for flood, irrigation and environmental resources. The outcome 
of this scoping process will be a JOSP governance design with clear roles, responsibility and systems 
for JOSP management and maintenance of the infrastructure to ensure flood water harvesting and 
storage, for later use for irrigation and environmental benefits for Middle and Lower Shabelle regions.  
In year 2 the focus of the governance capacity building will move to the establishment of the JOSP 
Central Management Organisation with the Federal and State governments.  This will include the 
selection and capacity building of focal points for each stakeholder group, as well as the selection of 
private sector operator for the infrastructure management, maintenance and cost recovery for these 
services.  In year three, once key infrastructure is operational, the governance emphasis will move 
to piloting the infrastructure operations, maintenance and cover recovery with irrigation users.  This 
will result in multiple cycles of seasonal flood harvesting, storage and release to river and irrigation 
command areas for users.  The detail of this multi-year governance building process will need to be 
co-created with government, irrigation users with the support of specialist technical consultants with 
strong background in water governance at this regional scale   
 
In the longer term, an authority needs to be set up to allocate water and regulate abstraction, but the 
immediate priority is to manage the existing infrastructure. It is significant that much of the work 
recommended for the JOSP and the wider river infrastructure relates to maintenance that has been 
previously deferred. If investment into the infrastructure is to result in sustained benefits, then it is 
vital that future operation and maintenance is properly carried out and managed. Funding mainte-
nance activities presents challenge, as the beneficiaries of the JOSP scheme are highly dispersed 
with a proportion of the stored irrigation water benefiting those in Middle and Lower Shabelle. The 
flood relief benefits offered by the scheme will be enjoyed by a large number of people but may not 
be directly associated with the operation of the scheme.  Once JOSP governance has been strength-
ened, the CMO will move towards a more sustainable revenue model through a Private Public Part-
nership approach for cost recovery from irrigation users via a Irrigation User Committee When it was 
constructed in 1980, the JOSP was a vital element in the long-term water management of the Sha-
belle river basin. Rehabilitation of the scheme has the potential to bring very significant flood and 
irrigation improvements to the region and to act as a focus for wider transformation in the regenera-
tion of riverine agriculture. Building such an authority is a prerequisite for the long-term success of 
the program and is dependent on several factors, not least continued political stability and security 
in the program region.
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
33 
 
FAO, IOM and UNEP have strong collaboration with both Federal and State level authorities to en-
courage and sustain active involvement of government institutions. FAO and UNEP will continue to 
build the capacity of government offices and institutions on policy strengthening and skill building to 
be able to manage water and food systems sustainably. In the context of the JOSP programme FAO 
will work hand-in-hand with the Ministry Water and Energy as lead ministry in a coordination role as 
well as supporting infrastructure development and technical expertise at Federal, State and local 
levels. 
This investment in government capacity and leadership is fundamental to sustain and build on results 
beyond the life of this project. FAO and UNEP shall work closely with government institutions to 
increase the capacity of government to put in place regulations, and to produce, disseminate and 
share high- quality information as well as to deliver market-oriented extension services. FAO and 
UNEP will support the development of area-based plans and will lead seasonal climate security and 
market gap analysis. 
Complementary to this project with other partner resources, FAO and UNEP will support the govern-
ment at Federal level to develop a water monitoring system, a Somalia Ecosystem and Strategy and 
Irrigation Master plan and to chair the Project Steering Committee. It establishes key information 
platforms such as water management, community governance and flood monitoring systems that 
will serve as foundations to reduce disaster or food crisis risks in the future. The government at 
Federal and State level provide services to farmers and water management committees including 
training of water management committees. The government at State Level will monitor the progress 
and quality of works achieved by community, contractors and local partners; support water manage-
ment committees in canal maintenance and planning water provision to farmers in the irrigation and 
reservoir command area. In summary the government at Federal and State level have an overarch-
ing coordination function, facilitating and coordinating project activities. Among other roles, the Gov-
ernment at state level will be involve in beneficiary selection and community mobilization, training. 
Consortium Governance & Management 
 
The RESTORE consortium will develop a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) agreement which 
defines how the consortium will function, delivergri outputs and its governance. This will include def-
inition of the following consortium management processes as agreed by the membership:  
− Decision-making    
− Reporting and supervision  
− Conflict and dispute resolution management  
− Coordination and communication  
− Project identity and visibility  
− Uniformity of project quality assurance  
− HQ and field relationship process  
 
The following functional groups will be created by the RESTORE consortium to provide governance, 
management, technical quality and implementation:  
  
Consortium Governance 
The RESTORE consortium will report to JOSP Program Steering Committee (JPSC). This group is 
co-chaired by MoEWR and MoAI, with membership from MoECC, Durable Solutions Secretariate, 
FCDO, USAID, EU, PBF, Danish Government, FAO, IOM & UNEP. This is a strategic oversight 
group responsible for JOSP strategic planning, review and alignment to government programming. 
The JPSC will manage the TRANSFORM project  (USAID), the RESTORE project (FCDO ) and the 
SJF project (RCO multi-donor funded ). The JPSC will meet firstly at the end of inception phase (6 
months) and then every 12 months thereafter upon the completion of each program phase  These
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
34 
 
meetings will be to review progress towards program milestones, approve recommendations for de-
sign change and provide decision-making function to proceed to the next phase of programming, or 
change design. In addition, the PSC may also decide to end the JOSP program and/or more to a 
Plan B option if the JOSP program is no longer viable as designed.    
See also Annex 9 on Governance arrangements. 
RESTORE Project Steering Committee (RPSC) 
The RESTORE project will be under the oversight of RESTORE Project Steering Committee 
(RPSC). This group is co-chaired by MoEWR and MoAI with membership of MoECC, FCDO, FAO, 
IOM & WVIS. This is a strategic oversight group responsible for RESTORE project strategic plan-
ning, review and alignment to JOSP programming. The RPSC will meet firstly at the end of incep-
tion phase (6 months) and then every 12 months thereafter and prior to the JPSC.  These meetings 
will be to review progress towards project milestones, approve recommendations for design 
change and provide decision-making function to proceed to the next phase of programming, or 
change design.  
JOSP & RESTORE Joint Implementation Group (JIG)RESTORE is a major project within the 
JOSP Core programming and will be managed by a RESTORE Project Manager, who reports to the  
JOSP Chief of Party (FAO)  The Chief of Party manages a JOSP Joint Implementation Group ( JIG 
), of which  there will be a dedicated RESTORE Project Manager   The RESTORE Project Manage-
ment is technically supported by Deputy Chief of Party (UNEP) who manages the technical quality 
of JOSP activities with the membership of the  Technical Advisory Group.  The Project Manager will 
be responsible for RESTORE programming planning, sequencing and integration with the JOSP 
program.  The Project Manager will manage a inter-agency team of technical staff from the RE-
STORE consortium membership seconded into the JIG. The RESTORE partners have responsibili-
ties for planning and implementation specific outcomes as  follows:  FAO, UNEP & IOM - outcome 
1,  FAO – outcome 2,  FAO & WVI – outcome 3,  FAO & UNEP  - outcome 4.  The technical staff 
from the consortium partners are responsible for managing the technical quality of each RESTORE 
outcome planning and implementation The RESTORE project manager will manage  the administra-
tion of partner grants and implementation performance management. The Project Manager is also 
the primary interface with government line ministries of MoEWR, MoAI & MoECC.    The majority of 
partner staff will be cost shared between RESTORE and other JOSP projects, as they are working 
on multiple projects within the JOSP program.  
 
JOSP Program Technical Quality 
A Technical Advisory Group (TAG) will be formed to support planning and technical guidance to the 
RESTORE consortium on alignment to sector specific strategies (water, irrigation, agriculture, envi-
ronment, durable solutions), priorities and standards. This group will have representatives of the UN 
agencies and each line ministries overseeing JOSP Core and Complimentary projects.  This group 
will support the  Joint Implementation Group and RESTORE Project Manager in the development of 
annual plans for projects and ensuring integration of programming between these projects to pro-
mote synergies, leverage impact, manage sequencing and provide advice and lobbying support to 
address contextual challenges to program implementation and success. Within the TAG, thematic 
working group of line ministry and relevant UN agencies will be established to support the technical 
quality standard across projects within the thematic area, and integration between projects in the 
thematic area.  TAG will also be a body for endorsement of annual project plans,  project progress 
review and technical quality assurance on a 6 monthly basis for JOSP and RESTORE to support 
updates to RESTORE Project Steering Committee. Program learning processes will be embedded 
in the JIG, with technical expertise providing quality assurance oversight and the responsibility of 
identifying learning and implement project improvements in next project implementation phase. The
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
35 
 
TAG is empowered with the authority to raise project quality assurance issue or Do No Harm issue 
to the JOSP management and RESTORE PSC in the event that significant risk of activity failure or 
doing harm is present. This provides an independent Quality Assurance function over JOSP projects.  
. 
  JOSP & RESTORE Project Implementation & Monitoring 
The JOSP Implementation Group (JIG) will be the key group for detailed planning of program and 
project implementation.  This is day-to-day work of implementation management by technical experts 
with support from other administration units as required.   The JIG will report to the JOSP Manage-
ment.  Each project, including RESTORE, in the JOSP core programming will have a Project Man-
ager assigned.  The project manager will be supported by the technical experts in the JIG to imple-
ment the project.  The technical experts will be shared across the core programming projects.  The 
technical experts of the JIG will be subject matter specialists in water engineering, water governance, 
environmental management, agriculture and disaster risk reduction. A focal point from each line min-
istry will be seconded to be part of the JIG to integrate government into implementation and planning.  
This will be a capacity building role also for the line Ministries (MoAI, MoEWR, MoECC) as they will 
be mentored by the relevant technical expert for the sectoral work they are engaged in.  
Within RESTORE \ implementation management, the Project Manager will work with each UN 
agency that is responsible to lead specific outcomes in the design.  Each outcome also has govern-
ment and non-government partners that play the role of implementing specific outputs and activities 
within the outcome. The UN agency will have focal point to work with these partners to plan and 
deliver activities to achieve RESTORE project outputs.  These focal points will also work across 
RESTORE outcomes and with the consortium management and technical advisory Group to ensure 
integration of project implementation into the overall JOSP core programming framework.  The im-
plementation of RESTORE works will occur in quarterly cycles, followed by progress review with 
Technical Advisory Group level, with refinements made for coming seasonal forecast and seasonal 
early warnings. The Joint Implementation Group will be based in Jowhar in order to place the tech-
nical staff as close as possible to project implementation villages and to promote close integration 
and strong liaison with the Hirshabelle State 
The consortium structure and roles of each partner are outlined in Annex 10. The  integra-
tion of RESTORE project governance with JOSP program governance is outlined below
=== PAGE 36 ===
Foreign, Commonwealth
& Development Office
RESTORE Project Governance Structure
JOSP shared
function with
RESTORE
RESTOREonly
function
Technical
Grau p
Outcome T
UNEP/IOM/FAO
Program Steering
Committee
RESTORE
Project Steering
Committee
Chief Technical
Advisor
Deputy Chief
Teehnical Ad•visar
RESTORE
Project Manager
UKaid
from the British
Outcome 4
FAO/UNEP
OutconuO
36
Outcome 3
FAO'WVI
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
37 
 
List of annexes: 
 
Annex 1 - Map of JOSP Command area showing resource partner investments.   
Annex 2 - Budget (see Excel attachment) 
Annex 2 - Log frame (see Excel attachment) 
Annex 3 - Risk Matrix (see Word attachment) 
Annex 4 – Workplan (see Excel attachment) 
Annex 5 - JOSP Masterplan (whole of programme) & dependencies related to delivery.   
Annex 6 – Description of Crisis Modifier mechanism 
Annex 7 - JOSP/RESTORE Beneficiary Breakdown   
Annex 8 - Snapshot of Jowhar Offstream Programme to which RESTORE contributes.  
Annex 9 – Proposed programme governance (MoAI/MoEWR) 
Annex 10 – Consortium and partnership management structures  
Annex 11 – JOSP Theory of Change (see JPEG attachment)
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
38 
 
Annex 1. Map of JOSP Command area showing resource partner investments
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
39 
 
Annex 2: Map of JOSP Potential Irrigation Expansion Area
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
40 
 
 
Annex 5: JOSP Masterplan (whole of programme) & dependencies related to delivery   
 
Inception Deliverables 
 
The RESTORE and TRANSFORM inception phase will require critical deliverables to be in 
place in order for programming to proceed into the implementation.  These deliverables will be 
the product of multiple processes by the UN partners with government and communities being 
implemented during the inception phase.   The following 6 deliverables must be in place at the 
end inception phase period:  
 
1. Mott Macdonald feasibility study, Environmental Social Safeguards Plan, Natural 
Resource Management Baseline confirms feasibility of JOSP infrastructure re-
habilitation       
 
The viability of the JOSP infrastructure rehabilitation will be established by update of the 2015 
Mott Macdonald feasibility study with verification on the ground by Mott Macdonald team, as-
sisted by MoAI & MoEWR engineers.  Parallel to this infrastructure focus, the RESTORE pro-
ject will support Environmental Social Safeguards (ESS) screening to identify risk issues at 
specific sites. This will include the development of climate resilient infrastructure options for 
future climate scenarios. ESS and climate resilient infrastructure options will e then be devel-
oped into action plans to treat social, environment and future climate risks. These action plans 
will be integrated into the infrastructure designs or NRM, conflict mitigation and durable solu-
tions activities of the RESTORE project for post inception implementation. Parallel to the ESS 
process, the project will also conduct a Natural Resource Management baseline to establish 
the status of environment assets within the project area to measure change and improvement 
over time because of project activities.   
 
 
2. Preliminaries study and plan identify effective conflict mediation strategies over 
land and water management in JOSP command area 
 
Critical to the viability of the JOSP programming will be ensuring that inter clan competition 
and conflict over land and water resources is mitigated.  RESTORE will support the assess-
ment and analysis of inter clan conflict within the JOSP command area, and specifically the 
links of these conflicts to land tenure and water access.  Once these dynamics are understood 
better, the project will work with conflicting communities and local government to identify and 
plan approaches to reduce conflict over natural resources. The plans will then be integrated 
into the post-inception implementation  
                                   
3. Preliminaries study and plan identify adequate Durable Solutions options for 
community subject to JOSP-driven displacement because of increased flooding 
likelihood    
 
There are seven villages that have been identified as being at high risk of flooding that would 
occur from increased water storage in the off-stream reservoir. These informal settlements 
have an estimated population of up to 90 households who are displaced persons. These peo-
ple have moved into the reservoir land to farm the area during dry season when water levels 
recede.  The seven villages will need to relocate in order for the reservoir to return to its original 
full capacity. A number of assessments and analysis are required to create durable solutions 
for these seven communities.  During inception phase, IOM will undertake an durable solutions 
assessment with these communities, local government and surrounding communities. This will 
identify the reasons for displacement, the reasons why communities have settled within the 
reservoir and possible options for resettlement of these households.  The conflict dynamic
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
41 
 
assessment over natural resources will also be used to determine possible conflict issues that 
need to be mitigated for viable durable solutions.  Parallel to the durable solutions assessment 
and planning, an assessment and plan for land tenure solutions will be developed for these 
resettling households.  Land tenure will also be critical for the JOSP command area as the 
irrigation farms were originally government owned sugar estate, rather than individual house-
hold farms as they currently operate. An assessment of livelihood options and livelihood plan 
needs to be created for these households.  By the end of the inception phase, a clear govern-
ment and community endorsed durable solutions plan will need be established to support the 
households of these seven villages to have resettlement locations, with land tenure, with a 
conflict mitigation mechanism and viable livelihood options.  This plan will be integrated into 
the post-inception implementation plan        
 
4. Preliminaries study and plan confirm State & Local authority capacity for effec-
tive land administration for land where JOSP infrastructure is located  
 
The JOSP command area was once a government owned and operated sugar cane farm dur-
ing the 1970 – 1990 period.  Following the collapse of the central government in the 1990s, 
the state-owned farm-land become privately cultivated by individual households and has re-
mained this way until the present.  The land tenure of these farmers is not clear, and not en-
dorsed by the government. There is potential for increased land conflict to develop as irrigation 
infrastructure of the JOSP command area creates increased land value, and potential disputes 
between people cultivating that land and those that have claims on that land.  An assessment 
and plan for land tenure for the farmers in the JOSP command area is required in order for 
land access to be formalized for these individual farmers, and a dispute mechanism estab-
lished for land access disputes to be resolved.   This plan will be developed with government 
and communities during the inception phase, and then integrated into post inception imple-
mentation.   
 
5. Security environment allows government & partners have access to JOSP com-
mand area for JOSP implementation and monitoring         
 
The JOSP command area until relatively recently was not fully assessable to government and 
international agencies.  Progress in military offensives around Jowhar and Balcad districts 
have pushed Al Shabab forces back to the point where all the key infrastructure was accessible 
for government and international actors. This represents the first time in decades that the JOSP 
infrastructure is accessible for rehabilitation, allowing for the restoration of irrigation and flood 
mitigation for riverine communities in Middle and Lower Shabelle. Maintaining this increased 
access to JOSP infrastructure is required for rehabilitation and ongoing operation and mainte-
nance of infrastructure.  
  
6. JOSP Governance entity is scoped, endorsed and roadmap for implementation 
formulated for ongoing operations and management of infrastructure 
 
The JOSP flood and irrigation system was originally developed and managed by central gov-
ernment prior to its collapse in the 1990s.  Decades later, there is no institution responsible for 
managing the key infrastructure for flood water harvesting and water storage and water ac-
cess, or the maintenance of this infrastructure.  The Federal and State government ministries 
(MoAI & MoEWR) need work with water governance experts to provide scope for a new insti-
tution that will be responsible for these services and maintenance of the JOSP infrastructure. 
The RESTORE project will work closely with MoEWR & MoAI with a water governance con-
sultancy to assess and analysis the requirements of governance entity for JOSP operations 
and maintenance, and the stakeholder membership of such a group.   This will include gov-
ernment, community users and options for private sector service providers.  The results of this 
analysis will be used to develop a JOSP governance plan.  This plan will include how the entity
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
42 
 
will be established, its functions, the memberships, the services, the capacity requirements 
and options for cost recovery for these services.  This plan will become the activities for post-
inception activities under Outcome 4 of the RESTORE project.  
 
The full list of preliminaries foreseen within the inception phase of the project (to run concur-
rently) include: 
- 
Engineering feasibility study update (FAO) 
- 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Analysis and Plan (UNEP) 
- 
Durable Solutions and conflict mitigation analysis and plan (IOM) 
- 
Land Tenure Mgt plan (UN Habitat) 
- 
Public Private Partnership Plan (UNIDO) 
- 
JOSP Governance Plan (FAO) 
- 
Gender Analysis (FAO or outsourced) 
 
In addition to this, technical baseline data will be gathered to ensure programme impact and 
outcomes can be monitored and measured (FAO/UNEP): 
- 
HEA on JOSP beneficiaries 
- 
Land Cover Baseline for JOSP command area 
- 
Environmental analysis of ecosystems and soil health 
- 
Water resource monitoring (JOSP) 
- 
Crop Monitoring (Lidar) 
- 
Ecosystem, soil and vegetation loss monitoring & EW system 
 
 
Programmatic dependencies:  
 
There are two major programmatic dependencies to be addressed for the productive infra-
structure to be completed successfully:   1) Durable Solutions for 7 villages located on the edge 
of the JOSP Reservoir; 2) Governance of the infrastructure management and maintenance for 
sustainability.   Programming to address these issues are outlined below (#4 Durable Solutions 
& # 5 Effective Governance).   
 
1)Productive Infrastructure Development 
  
The outcome of the rehabilitation of the JOSP productive infrastructure is to ensure flood risk 
reduction and irrigation water access in Middle and Lower Shabelle.  This will be achieved 
through the rehabilitation of the following infrastructure to achieve specific outputs: 
  
Infrastructure 
Purpose 
Dependencies 
Year 
Donor 
Sabuun Bar-
rage 
Regulates Shabelle river 
level and divert flood wa-
ter into JOSP system 
Links to Supply Canal 
One  
USAID 
Supply Canal 
Conveys flood water into 
JOSP Reservoir for use 
for irrigation in Middle and 
Lower Shabelle 
Supplied by Sabuun 
Barrage, and links to 
JOSP Reservoir.  Dura-
ble Solutions for 7 vil-
lages to be in place be-
fore rehabilitation is 
completed.  
Two 
  
USAID 
JOSP Reser-
voir 
Storage of flood water for 
irrigation use and eco-
system services to Middle 
and Lower Shabelle 
Supplied by Supply Ca-
nal and linked to Outlet 
Canal. 
Two 
FCDO
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
43 
 
Durable Solutions for 7 
villages to be in place 
before rehabilitation is 
completed. 
Outlet Canal 
Conveys irrigation water 
from JOSP Reservoir to 
Shabelle River for use 
downstream by irrigation 
schemes in Middle and 
Lower Shabelle.  
Supplied by JOSP Res-
ervoir and links to Sha-
belle River.  
Two 
USAID 
  
2) Sustainable Natural Resource Management  
  
The outcome of sustainable natural resource management is to increase the availability of 
natural resources and of the ecosystem services they provide to communities in the form of 
land and water.  This will result from the comprehensive baseline, and regular subsequent 
monitoring, of environmental resources and land use within the land where the JOSP is lo-
cated.  This will identify critical land and water sources that need to be restored and enhanced 
for community use and resource use sustainability. This will also identify resources where the 
use of natural resources is disputed or unsustainable so that these can be addressed in the 
NRM programming.  This approach will include Nature Based Solutions for rehabilitated res-
ervoir embankments.  In areas around the reservoir, community level natural resource man-
agement plans will be the result of co-analysis of community natural resource uses and needs. 
Reducing conflict over land use and natural resources will be included in these plans. These 
plans link to agricultural production activities and flood risk reduction activities at community 
level to inform sustainable farm planning and practices.  These plans are also linked to envi-
ronmental peace building and durable solutions.  Of key importance is the land use planning 
and land tenure for the populations of IDP living in 7 settlements within the JOSP reservoir.  
Co-creating a sustainable land use approach for these communities and possible resettlement 
will be addressed in a complimentary project with IOM to support these durable solutions for 
these 7 villages (see below #4 Environmental Peacebuilding, HLP & Durable Solutions) 
  
The key dependency for this outcome is the rehabilitation of the JOSP reservoir embankments 
to provide for flood protection, then land use planning and environmentally sustainable prac-
tices on the flood prone land around the reservoir.  The rehabilitation of the reservoir over year 
one and two will enable the scale of sustainable natural resource management for the com-
munities around the reservoir.    
  
3)Agriculture Production  
  
A key outcome of the JOSP program is the reduction of flood risk and increasing irrigation 
water access for small holder farmers in Middle and Lower Shabelle.   The reservoir will hold 
up to 200 million cubic meters of water once the JOSP productive infrastructure is fully opera-
tional. The JOSP program will scale up support to agricultural production once the JOSP in-
frastructure is fully operational at the end of year two. This will target the small holder farmers 
cultivating land in the irrigation command areas of primary canals and direct intake canals 
downstream of JOSP in Middle Shabelle and Lower Shabelle.   The small holder farmers will 
be provided with two seasons of agriculture inputs in order for them to make best use of in-
creased irrigation water access.  At the same time, climate smart and agro-ecological exten-
sion services will be available for these farmers to support sustainable production increases.  
  
The key dependence for this outcome is the rehabilitation of the JOSP productive infrastruc-
ture.  This will occur by the end of year two of the program.
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
44 
 
4)Environmental Peacebuilding & Durable Solutions  
This outcome seeks to provide durable solutions for IDPs who have settled around the JOSP 
productive infrastructure over the last decades.  These settlements have resulted in due to the 
JOSP infrastructure and land becoming non-functional and uncultivated, leading to displaced 
households moving into the land for cultivation and settlement.  The key settlements that may 
require significant planning and possible resettlement are 7 small villages located within or on 
the edge of the JOSP reservoir.  When the rehabilitated reservoir is at full storage capacity it 
is possible these villages, or at least some of land used for farming around them will be likely 
to flood.  A preliminary analysis of the satellite imagery shows the villages vary in size from 5 
– 15 houses each settlement (approximately 30 – 90 people per village). This is estimated to 
be up to 90 HHs that may need some form of resettlement each of the land use around the 
reservoir it appears that farmland used by these 7 villages already floods during wet season.  
It is reasonable to assume that these farmers are using a form of flood recession agriculture 
during dry season on this land, rather than following the more common practice of cultivation 
during wet seasons as the land will be flooded during wet season.       
IOM is currently assessing these village populations, their population size, clan base, conflict 
dynamics with surrounding communities, basic service access and food security and livelihood 
options.  They will also be consulting with local government, clan leaders, IDP village leaders 
and neighboring communities who may accept to integrate these approximately 90 households 
over year one and two of the JOSP.  If this is agreed, a livelihood solution for these HHs will 
be required. This may include the continuation of flood recession farming on the land within 
the reservoir during dry season, subject to project level water in dry season.  Alternatively, the 
government and clan leaders may agree to allocation uncultivated plots of former government 
owned Sugar Estate. These farms will need the restoration of irrigation infrastructure and se-
cure land tenure for these plots for the settling houses.  If new settlements need to be created 
for these 7 villages, IOM & UN Habitat will work closely with local government on the identifi-
cation of potential sites, consultation with surrounding communities and durable solutions plan 
with these stakeholders. IOM is currently funded by the Government of Denmark to assess, 
consult and design durable solutions for these IDP communities over the first year and imple-
ment the first phase of this plan to ensure these 90 HH are not living within the reservoir by the 
end of year two.    
  
Durable Solutions Scenarios 
  
A durable solution for up to 7 IDP villages within reservoir area must be agreed and implemen-
tation should commence before the end of year two of the JOSP program if the years 3 – 5 
programming is to continue on the planned schedule. There are three scenarios to be explored 
for feasibility of durable solutions for these 7 villages:  
Scenario 1: Up to 90 IDP HHs (from 7 villages) integrate with neighboring villages with IOM 
support and continue flood recession farming inside the land of reservoir during dry season 
with FAO support.  
Scenario 2: Up to 90 IDPs HHs integrate with neighboring villages with IOM support and are 
allocated by government uncultivated Sugar Estate land for farming.  FAO to support these 
HHs with rehabilitated irrigation canals, inputs and extension services and UN Habitat with 
land tenure services. 
Scenario 3: Up to 90 IDPs HHs create new settlements on government allocated land with IOM 
support. These villages are allocated by the government uncultivated Sugar Estate land for 
farming.  FAO to support these HHs with rehabilitated irrigation canals, inputs and extension 
services and UNHabitat with land tenure services. 
It is possible that these three durable scenarios could take place simultaneously, with each of 
the 7 villages choosing different options with local government and host community agreement.  
IOM will work with stakeholders to co-create a durable solution plan based what stakeholder
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
45 
 
agree on. FAO will implement irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and UN-Habitat the new 
settlement planning, if required with Scenarios 1, 2 or 3. 
Critical to the viability and sustainability of these durable solutions scenarios, will be conflict 
mitigation over access to and use of natural resources by IDPs and Host communities. Ten-
sions over land tenure, land use and irrigation water access will likely to be present between 
IDPs and Hosts communities, especially if they are from different clan bases.  The JOSP pro-
gramming will identify the underlying tension and conflict risk around these resource use be-
tween stakeholders and co-create plans for joint use and management to reduce risk of con-
flict.  Such approaches have been used by IOM & FAO in other conflict prone riverine contexts 
successfully. Learning from these projects will be applied and scaled in the JOSP.   
  
5)Effective and Accountable Governance 
Critical to the sustainability of the JOSP will be governance capacity to ensure that water in-
frastructure is operated and maintained for ongoing service provision for flood risk reduction 
and irrigation water access.  This will require the creation of JOSP Central Management Or-
ganization for operation and maintenance and an Irrigation Committee to represent the inter-
ests of the irrigation user downstream. These institutions are yet to be created and will require 
the support of specialist water governance consultancy working closely with government, pri-
vate sector and farmers to develop a bespoke governance approach to the JOSP management 
and service provision. This consultancy will be hired under the RESTORE project. The consul-
tancy firm will work with stakeholders to provide the following sequenced deliverables over the 
5 years of the JOSP program:  
  
Year 1 – consultation with government (MoAI & MoEWR), irrigation farmer groups and poten-
tial private sector operators at federal and state level to define the scope of JOSP Central 
Management Organization.  This will then be agreed upon and legalized as institution withing 
Somalia- federal legal framework.  Parallel to this, with be a consultation with irrigation farming 
groups located in middle and lower Shabelle that are potential end users of increased irrigation 
water access that will result from the JOSP.  This will inform the creation of the Irrigation Com-
mittee, which will be the peak user group body to represent the interests of irrigation farmers 
using JOSP water, and act as the key entity in cost recovery for these services from irrigation 
farmers. The rehabilitation of key productive infrastructure of the supply canal, reservoir and 
outlet canal will not be completed until there is an agreement from federal and state govern-
ments to create the JOSP CMO, and a detailed plan for the legal establishment and imple-
mentation of CMO in Year 2.  
   
Year 2 - This will focus on the creation of the JOSP Central Management Organization (CMO) 
and the Irrigation committee.  Following the in-depth consultations of year one and scope def-
inition of these two entities, the institutions will be formed within the relevant legal and regula-
tory framework of the Somalia federal government.  This is likely to be part of the National 
Water Sector Coordination Facility or have strong connection to the facility.  Once formed and 
legally established, the CMO undertakes a process of capacity building with UN agencies to 
gradually assume the responsibility for the operations, maintenance and cost recovery for 
JOSP infrastructure and services.   
  
Year 3 - The capacity building of JOSP CMO & Irrigation Committee will be the focus of year 
3.  For the JOSP CMO, the capacity building activities focus on the core management and 
technical staff to be hired and trained and supported to develop the systems and service de-
livery of JOSP operations and maintenance. Parallel to this will be the development of a service 
agreement framework for a private sector service provider to be employed by the CMO to run 
the day-to-day operations of the JOSP and seasonal maintenance. For the irrigation commit-
tee, the focus of capacity building activities will be development of institutional governance and 
management for each primary canal water committee to have representation in the irrigation
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
46 
 
committee. This will lead to planning for water allocation on seasonal and annual basis from 
the JOSP storage capacity for each primary canal.  The management system for water vol-
umes telemetric monitoring will be established by the Irrigation Committee and implemented 
by each Primary canal committee under the Irrigation Committee management. This will es-
tablish a tracking of water volume and use in each primary canal for cost recovery purposes 
later. 
  
Year 4 – The JOSP CMO will continue to be supported to provide the services of flood water 
harvesting, water storages and irrigation water release. Seasonal maintenance will also be 
implemented by the private sector contract engaged by the CMO.  The funding for these ser-
vices will come from the JOSP projects budgets in the sort terms.  In year four, the develop-
ment of a cost recovery approach will be designed with the Irrigation Committee and the CMO, 
with a price on water usage, established for each primary canal, that will enable the irrigation 
users to have a clear financial contribution to access water each season.  Pre-existing water 
committees from each primary canal will be required to contribute these funds from the mem-
ber farmers in order to access irrigation water.   The funds will be collected by the Irrigation 
committee, which will contribute these to the JOSP CMO for cost of maintenance and man-
agement for each season. The cost recovery system will need to be designed and implemented 
by the water governance consultancy with the CMO and Irrigation Committee 
  
Year 5 - The implementation of the Cost recovery mechanism is the focus of year five.  This 
will enable the ongoing capacity of the JOSP CMO to continue providing services to the irriga-
tion users.  The seasonal services will include flood water harvesting, water storage and re-
lease, and the seasonal maintenance of the productive infrastructure by a private sector ser-
vice provider under contract to the CMO.  The outcome at year five is that JOSP CMO has the 
management and technical capacities to provide ongoing services to the irrigation users, and 
sufficient financial resources to cover the costs of service provision.  
  
Key deliverables dependencies for effective governance of JOSP  
  
The agreement in year one to create the JOSP CMO by federal and state governments will be 
a key milestone that will lead to rehabilitation of the productive infrastructure in JOSP program. 
This is a pre-condition to major infrastructure programming scale up in year 2.  Once this 
agreement is in place, the formation of the legal entities will take place, leading to incremental 
capacity building that leads to the point of institutional sustainability and cost recovery for ser-
vice provision.  
  
JOSP Deliverables Sequencing 
  
The integration and phasing deliverable in the JOSP programming streams is critical to suc-
cess. The sequencing of JOSP major deliverables and their dependencies is outlined as fol-
lows:   
  
STREAM 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
1. Productive 
Infrastructure 
Consult, 
assess & 
design 
Sabuun 
barrage re-
hab.  
Supply ca-
nal & outlet 
canal re-
hab  
Infrastruc-
ture opera-
tion & 
maintenance 
(O&M) 
Infrastructure 
operation & 
maintenance 
Infrastructure 
operation & 
maintenance 
2. Sustainable 
Resource 
Management 
Consult, 
assess & 
design 
Reservoir 
rehab & 
NbS 
NbS for 
flood risk re-
duction & ir-
rigation 
NbS for flood 
risk reduction 
& irrigation 
NbS for flood 
risk reduction 
& irrigation
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
47 
 
3. Agriculture 
Production  
Consult & 
design 
Capacity 
building of 
MoAI ex-
tension 
services 
Inputs & ex-
tension 
Inputs, exten-
sion & mar-
kets 
Extension & 
markets 
4. Environmen-
tal peace build-
ing & 
Durable Solu-
tions 
Consult, 
assess, de-
sign for 
settlement 
& land ten-
ure 
Land ten-
ure, Settle-
ment solu-
tion & con-
flict mitiga-
tion  
Basic ser-
vices & live-
lihoods. 
Conflict miti-
gation 
Basic services 
& livelihoods. 
Conflict miti-
gation 
Basic services 
& livelihoods. 
Conflict miti-
gation 
5. Effective & 
Accountable 
Governance 
Consult & 
design of 
JOSP CMO 
& Irrigation 
Committee. 
Agreement 
on for-
mation  
JOSP 
CMO & Irri-
gation 
Committee 
formalized.  
Capacity 
building for 
service 
provision 
Capacity 
building for 
O&M.  Flood 
& irrigation 
services pro-
vision to Irri-
gation com-
mittee 
Capacity 
building for 
O&M. Flood & 
irrigation ser-
vice provision. 
O&M Cost re-
covery mecha-
nism estab-
lished 
Capacity 
building for 
O&M. Flood 
risk reduction 
and irrigation 
services provi-
sion. O&M 
Cost recovery 
mechanism 
implemented 
  
A detailed master workplan of the activities in each JOSP programming Stream and budget 
is attached for reference. 
  
Plan “B’s” and decision gates:  
The JOSP program workplan will have decision gates at the end of each implementation 
phase. These decision gates will create the opportunity for the Program Steering Committee 
to consider next programming steps at a strategic level.  This will result in decisions by the 
PSC to continue the program, redesign the program or end the program, based on the achieve-
ment or lack of achievement of program milestones, or a major change in program context, 
such as lack of secure access.  
  
Gate 1.  End of inception phase (6 months) milestones: 
- 
Completion of all preliminary studies and plans 
- 
Recommendations to PSC for design changes based on studies results  
- 
PSC defines recommendations as viable resulting in year one plan implementation 
based on refined JOSP program design  
  
Gate 2.   End of year one (12 months) milestones: 
- 
Completion of Sabuun Barrage 
- 
Completion of reservoir southern embankment 
- 
Agreement of FGS & Hirashabelle State on the creation of JOSP CMO 
- 
Agreement of Hirshabelle State and Jowhar/Balcad clans on durable solutions for 7 
villages in reservoir land  
- 
Continued security access to the JOSP sites allows for ongoing project works 
- 
PSC agrees to continue to year 2 plan implementation or redesign 
  
Gate 3.   End of year two (24 months) milestones: 
- 
Relocation and/or integration of up to 360 IDPs from 7 villages into nearby villages 
population 
- 
Farming land solution or other livelihood solution for the 360 IDPs from these 7 vil-
lages 
- 
Completion of the Supply Canal to prevent flooding and supply irrigation.
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
48 
 
- 
Completion of the Outlet Canal to prevent flooding and supply irrigation. 
- 
JOSP CMO and Irrigation Committee created as legal institutions under federal law 
and core membership recruited  
- 
Continued security access to the JOSP sites allows for ongoing project works. 
- 
PSC agrees to continue to Year 3 plan implementation or redesign.  
  
Gate 4.    End of year three (36 months) milestones:  
- 
Commencement of agricultural production scale up on newly irrigated land, including 
land of newly settled IDP farmers 
- 
JOSP CMO has management and technical capacity to provide operations and 
maintenance of infrastructure  
- 
JOSP CMO provides services of flood water harvesting, storage and water release to 
Irrigation Committee membership 
- 
Continued security access to the JOSP sites allows for ongoing project works. 
- 
PSC agrees to continue to Year 4 plan implementation or redesign.  
  
  
Gate 5.   End for year four (48 months):   
- 
Scale up of agricultural production scale up on newly irrigated land in middle and 
lower Shabelle via irrigation canals managed by the Irrigation committee membership 
- 
JOSP CMO continues to management and technical capacity to provide operations 
and maintenance of infrastructure and a private sector service provider in place.   
- 
JOSP CMO provides services of flood water harvesting, storage and water release to 
Irrigation Committee membership 
- 
Irrigation Committee and JOSP have agreed to a cost recovery mechanism for opera-
tions and maintenance cost of the JOSP. 
- 
Continued security access to the JOSP sites allows for ongoing project works. 
- 
PSC agrees to continue to Year 5 plan implementation or redesign.  
  
In the event of the PSC deciding during any of these decision gates that the milestones for 
next phase implementation have not been met, this will lead to a either a redesign of the pro-
gram plan and modalities to ensure the milestones are met within the next phase.  Alternatively, 
if the PSC decides that it is highly unlikely that milestones can be met, or that security context 
has changed to not allow access for work to continue, this may lead to a decision to end the 
JOSP program in it’s current form as it is no longer viable.   In this event, Plan B’s options can 
be considered as alternatives.  
  
Plan B options. 
  
1. Redesign of the JOSP program:  
The lack of achievement of milestones from any of these gates will result in the Program Im-
plementation Unit revisiting program modalities and timelines to ensure that these milestones 
are feasible and can be achieved in the following implementation phase through redesign.  
These redesign options will be presented to the PSC for decision-making on if they are ac-
ceptable and will be included in design changes for the following implementation phase.   The 
implication of this approach is that some delay in implementation may occur as some mile-
stones will delay the start of some part of the next phase of works. This is especially the case 
for year one and year two milestones.  In the event of delays in year one or year two milestones 
achievement, all efforts will be made to consolidate milestones in years three, four and five to 
ensure full program achievement at the end of year five.  
  
2. Reduce scope of the JOSP program:
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
49 
 
A redesign of the JOSP program to reduce the scope of work to focus only on locations with 
access for agencies may occur.  This scenario may be considered if the security access re-
duces following the ATMIS draw down at end of year 2.  By this stage, the major infrastructure 
will be rehabilitated and the key will be ensuring that ongoing service provision by JOSP CMO.  
This may result in a move of target areas for further programming closer to the river where 
government control is more likely to continue, rather than in the newly recovered areas. The 
reduced geographic focus will concentrate on efforts on accessible areas for Government, 
agencies and their partners. 
  
3. Retargeting of the JOSP funding to South West State 
By the end of year two, the JOSP program will have succeeded in providing rehabilitation of 
the majority of flood and irrigation infrastructure in the JOSP system.  At this point, flood water 
can be managed and irrigated water supplied downstream, assuming that governance capacity 
can be maintained. In the event that lack of security access around the JOSP infrastructure 
results the need to retarget funding to a different location with access.  FAO is developing a 
programming option that targets the rehabilitation of mega water catchments around Baidoa 
district, that once formed the basis for agro-pastoralist resilience.  The funding for JOSP reha-
bilitation could be retargeted to focus on these water sources, their governance and livelihoods 
surrounding them.  This would reach a lower number of beneficiaries than the JOSP system. 
But it would ensure a major benefit for a highly drought vulnerable region of Somalia.
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
50 
 
Annex 6 – Description of Crisis Modifier for Anticipatory Action under RESTORE 
 
The RESTORE project will have a dedicated Crisis Modifier fund under Outcome 3.  This will 
provide  the capacity for Anticipatory Action to protect community resilience gains being imple-
mented under Outcomes 1, 2 & 3.  WVIS will be the partner responsible for design and delivery 
of the Crisis Modifier, with decision support services from  SWALIM climate monitoring and 
early warning. The primary purpose of the Crisis Modifier is Anticipatory Action, within the 
framework of  Community Action Plans ( CAPs ).   The CAPs include Anticipatory Actions that 
are protective of community level resilience in response to Early Warning.  Depending on the 
risk village context, anticipatory action may also contribute to Disaster Risk Reduction activi-
ties, which are also part of the CAP.  The process of implementing the  Crisis Modifier will 
include the following  8 step process:  
 
1. Climate risk analysis 
  
The analysis of climate risk occurs first as Middle Shabelle level using SWALIM data to inform 
programming of natural hazards and communities particularly at risk.    Using satellite imagery, 
topographic modals and flood modelling scenarios, the locations most at risk to flood and 
drought will be identified for more detailed community level analysis of risk  and community 
action planning 
  
2. Community DRR analysis 
  
At a community level, IOM and their partner, will work with communities to understand the 
history of climate shocks within the village and surrounding farming land. This will lead a 
deeper village understanding of specific natural hazards, the risk level they present and the 
frequency and magnitude of incidence. Based on this shared and co-created analysis of cli-
mate impact on natural resource risks, the community will be supported to identify options that 
can be implemented to reduce risks to people’s lives and livelihood.  These options are then 
used to co-create a Community Action Plan.  
  
3. Community Action Plans (CAP) 
  
The Community Action Plan (CAP) identifies the specific natural resource risk that impact the 
lives and livelihoods in the villages, and treatment actions to reduce the impact of these risks 
and recovery rapidly from a shock incident.  The CAP provides indicators for early warning of 
shock, and specific Anticipatory Actions to be taken when these triggers are hit.  The Anticipa-
tory Action menu is scalable to match the magnitude of the forecast shock and activities 
change through each phase of the disaster from mitigation, preparedness, response and re-
covery.  The CAP activities can be financial resourced by ongoing project activities (NbS as 
mitigation works) and also preparedness, response and recovery from the Anticipatory Action 
Fund within the RESTORE project budget.  
  
4. Early Warning 
SWALIM has comprehensive climate early warning system for flood and drought already in 
place. This provides high level analysis of flood and drought risks, with forecasting for shock 
and scalable warning system using SMS, web and radio channels once trigger for alert are 
reached.  The triggers of this system have been established based on over 15 years of climate 
shock analysis.  To add to this high-level analysis and warning, the RESTORE project will use 
the CAP process to identify community knowledge of early warning triggers based on local 
knowledge.  The local knowledge will be used to co-create community-based triggers to further 
inform early warning.  These triggers will be added to the CAP and the early warning system 
that SWALIM already has in place to trigger Anticipatory Actions
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
51 
 
5. Anticipatory Action 
The risk reduction, anticipatory  response and proactive early recovery from a shock are the 
key to reducing the impact of climate shocks on lives and livelihoods.  The Anticipation Action 
framework for RESTORE will provide a menu of  actions that will correspond to the type and 
scale of the shock at community level.  The actions will be funded by the Anticipatory Action 
Fund, within the project budget.    
       6. DRR 
The CAP will define the specific natural resources that present a natural hazard to the com-
munity.  This could be in the form of flood or drought. Using the NBS activities under Outcome 
1, the project will work over the longer term to reduce the risk of this hazard presents to lives 
and livelihoods of villagers. In event of a shock, the impact of this event will be reduced as the 
community has taken proactive steps to manage the natural hazard.    DRR activities can be 
also topped up with cash from diaspora and community contributions to increase the scope of 
activities.   
  
6. Prepare/Mitigation  
The seasonal forecasting from SWALIM and the early warning triggers in the CAP provide the 
warning and alert to prepare for a pending shock, such as flood or drought.  Using the CAP 
planning process, the community will have defined the actions to take in response to that pend-
ing shock.  The Anticipatory Action Fund will support the implementation of these activities and 
enable the community to proactively prepare ahead of the wet or dry season. The activities will 
be designed to protect villages and farms from loss and damage with short term intervention 
before the shock event.  
  
7. Respond 
A humanitarian response to the shock requires a significant increase in funding and specific 
emergency response capacity.  The project will use the forecasting and early warning trigger 
to proactively work with the emergency response actors to pre-identify expected humanitarian 
needs and vulnerable caseloads that will likely need assistance.  These activities will be funded 
from humanitarian funds outside the RESTORE project budget.  These will be short term ac-
tivities for the during of shock to save lives and protect livelihoods from damage and loss.  
  
5. 8. Recovery 
Following the end of shock, proactive actions will be taken to assist affected communities to 
rapidly recover their livelihoods.  This will be to make the best use of the available natural 
resources and the seasonality to get livelihoods functional as soon as possible.   These activ-
ities will be pre-identified in the CAP by communities and which households are most likely to 
require assistance due to the risk exposure and pre-existing vulnerabilities.  
  
Application in 2024 El Nino – Anticipatory Action in practice: 
 
The Deyr wet season in 2024 presents an opportunity for implementing the Anticipatory Action 
immediately following a climate shock of flood within the RESTORE project area.  The major 
flood is forecast in the Jowhar area, which highly likely to lead to flood damage to villages and 
farms around the JOSP reservoir.  Short term displacement and crop losses are expected to 
occur.   Although a CAP process has not yet started in RESTORE for these villages, the 
SWALIM analysis of the flooding using satellite images will enable the project to identify the 
most flood affected locations in the project area.  Using this analysis, WVIS will assess the 
extent of the flood damage in these villages.  This will define which villages will receive recov-
ery assistance. DRR preparation and mitigation of the flood affects has been already occurring 
in the preceding months with rehabilitation of river embankments in Jowhar, the pre-positioning 
of sandbags and training of community and government in sandbag wall construction.  This is 
funded by the FCDO under the El Nino response and World Bank SCRP program.  The hu-
manitarian cash response is in the process of being planned in response to this flood, with an
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
52 
 
emphasis on providing cash transfer to flood affected households to support them following 
the loss of their crops. The RESTORE project will program GBP 500,000 for  Cash for Work 
flood drainage to provide short term food security during the Jilaal season following the heavy 
crop losses from the El Nino flood.  The cleaning of shallow wells within these flood affected 
villages will also occur.  The target villages   with a focus on flood affected farming around the 
JOSP reservoir and the JOSP supply canal. Parallel to this RESTORE funded El Nino action, 
FAO will   will focus on farming input packages for flood recession farming. This will include 
fast maturing seed varieties and irrigation pump hours for small holder farmers around the 
reservoir area that have lost their crops due to flooding. This agricultural activity will be funded 
by other donors, rather than FCDO.   
 
Anticipatory Action in Jilaal (Cash for Work & Shallow Well Cleaning) 
The project will provide targeted support to populations groups at different levels and vulnera-
bility and ensure that their present situation is considered and responsive support provided to 
translate to highest impact. Due to different asset bases, shock exposure impact and severity, 
households (HH) in flood affected locations are not in similar situations and as such not all 
interventions will work for them. For this reason, the project will develop a menu of prioritized 
approaches that achieve the following; cash for work activities to provide both short term cash 
for beneficiaries and longer-term benefits through restoration of community assets. This tar-
geted approach ensures that not only is the design of the program sensitive to contextual re-
alities but invests resources where they are best suited to generate high impact.  
The project will carry out location identification and community engagement prior to commenc-
ing activities. The community engagement exercise will include religious leaders and youth 
leaders representing the larger communities in the identification and prioritization of activity 
typology across all activity types including infrastructure to be rehabilitated via cash for work, 
and which wells need to be prioritized for cleaning to increase their functionality.  
The project will rehabilitate or reconstruct water points and small-scale soil and rainwater man-
agement infrastructure through Cash for Work (CfW) in villages where communal assets have 
been damaged by floods, which may include but not limited to water pans, shallow wells, soil 
bunds and stone lines for range land rehabilitation and / or flood control infrastructure etc. and 
develop specifications for the work in line with build back better principles. Tailored to ensuring 
improved water ways downstream and reduced susceptibility to flooding, communities will be 
supported to adopt nature based approach to prioritization of recovery actions, this includes 
prioritizing indigenous vegetation, riparian buffers in the form of revetments and revegetation 
with local resilient crop varieties that act as slope stabilizers and collectively slow down run-off 
by absorbing excess water, reducing peak flow and helping to mitigate potential flood damage 
downstream. 
The amount of cash will be based on the Minimum Expenditure Basket (MEB) that is prescribed 
by the Somalia Cash Working Group which is currently pegged at USD 84 per month for the 
region. The work norm will be USD6 per worker per day for 14-days a month. Money will be 
transferred through mobile phones through vetted service providers. The project’s CfW com-
ponent will focus on addressing flood damage and improving drainage with NbS approaches 
based on findings from a rapid assessment.     
 
Prior to the commencement of any CfW work, there will be a detailed assessment to ensure 
that resources will be committed to rehabilitating/ reconstructing infrastructure that will bring 
maximum benefits for target communities in an effort to maximize VFM while doing no or min-
imum damage to the environment. This assessment will build on the outcome of the community 
prioritization meetings. The project will prioritize rehabilitation of shallow wells nearby the river 
banks for riverine communities, while also engaging CfW beneficiaries in the rehabilitation of 
water pans and rangelands. 
 
Many infrastructure rehabilitating/ reconstructing activities will have an impact on the natural 
environment e.g. soil disturbance, cutting down of trees and vegetation clearance which may
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
53 
 
lead to increased soil erosion due to increased runoff and reduce percolation, which in turn 
has negative impacts on the local water table and aquifer recharge. Environmental mitigation 
plans that minimize soil erosion, e.g., reforestation and erosion control structures, will be con-
sidered, as applicable, whilst planning rehabilitating/reconstructing activities.   
 
The project will support 9 villages and 5,535 HHs through CfW interventions depending on the 
outcomes of the rapid assessment and CfW needs identified by the communities. 
The project will cover approximately 360 HHs assuming there will be at least 2 wells per village 
that require cleaning. 
 
Long term CM:  
 
Throughout the 5-year project cycle, the JOSP command area will inevitably experience envi-
ronmental shocks, such as severe flooding, which will demand immediate action. The RE-
STORE Crisis Modifier Instrument will comprise anticipatory action and contingency plans for-
mulated in the context of an early warning system. Designed during the inception phase of the 
project, the early warning system is based on pre-agreed, data-based early-action thresholds, 
or triggers, tailored to the specific conditions of every target village. When early-action thresh-
olds are breached, village-level anticipatory action plans are triggered, and the response will 
be delivered through existing IOM structures. A detailed analysis during the inception is re-
quired to develop the Menu of actions in collaboration with communities and allocate a per-
centage of the overall project funding that would protect the RESTORE investments throughout 
the project cycle.
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
54 
 
Annex 7 – JOSP/RESTORE Beneficiary Breakdown 
 
While up to date census data does not exist for Somalia, the below estimates are based on 
current available data from FSNAU and SWALIM and are expected to change once detailed 
baseline data has been collected during the inception phase of the programme. Furthermore, 
there is no solid baseline for the irrigated areas or an updated land cover and land use map of 
Somalia. However, based on available data, according to the below estimates Merka, Qooroley 
and parts of Afgoye would be considered downstream beneficiaries. Once the reservoir is re-
stored to full capacity the water is expected to go even further downstream, but the project 
does not plan to measure this mainly due to access constraints. 
FAO will update this critical data set during the inception phase to provide much more precise 
estimates on the expected population directly benefitting from the restored water supply, yield, 
production values etc. Project specific estimates (FCDO column below) are notional, based on 
geographical coverage of the FCDO-related infrastructure and interventions, FCDO’s contri-
bution should be considered as an integral part of the JOSP programme-level targets. The 
three tables below represent different coverage of the same population group and should not 
be considered cumulative. The total JOSP target population is 1.65million people across the 
five districts. 
A) Ecosystem in the reservoir: 
 
Ecosystems 
Total District 
Population (no. 
of pp) 
Water storage 
(no. of pp) 
% supported 
by JOSP  
% FCDO 
Afgoye 
505,587 
64,957 
100% 
        32,479  
Jowhar 
391,961 
97,281 
100% 
        48,641  
Balcad 
358,453 
50,691 
100% 
        25,346  
Merka 
264,679 
90,665 
100% 
        45,333  
Qooroley 
135,558 
65,293 
100% 
        32,647  
TOTAL 
1,656,238 
368,887 
  
      184,444 
 
 
B) Irrigation: 
 
Irrigation 
Total District 
Population (no. 
of pp) 
Riverine Grav-
ity Irrigation 
(no. of pp) 
% supported 
by JOSP  
% FCDO 
Afgoye 
505,587 
64,957 
100% 
        32,479  
Jowhar 
391,961 
97,281 
100% 
        48,641  
Balcad 
358,453 
50,691 
100% 
        25,346  
Merka 
264,679 
90,665 
100% 
        45,333  
Qooroley 
135,558 
65,293 
100% 
        32,647  
TOTAL 
1,656,238 
368,887 
  
      184,444  
 
C) Flood Protection
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
55 
 
Flood re-
lief 
Total Dis-
trict Pop-
ulation 
(no. of pp) 
Riverine 
(rural) 
Agropas-
toral (ru-
ral) 
Pastoral 
(rural) 
Urban 
IDP (rural 
& urban) 
% JOSP 
% FCDO 
Afgoye 
505,587 
64,957 
238,17
5 
6,186 
166,965 
29,574 
505,857 
252,929 
Jowhar 
391,961 
97,281 
138,62
5 
7,296 
71,799 
76,960 
391,961 
195,981 
Balcad 
358,453 
50,691 
152,07
2 
50,691 
83,999 
21,000 
358,453 
179,227 
Merka 
264,679 
90,665 
16,838 
2,589 
117,633 
36,954 
110,092 
55,046 
Qoorole
y 
135,558 
65,293 
13,978 
9,479 
46,808 
0 
135,558 
67,779 
TOTAL 
1,656,238 
368,887 
559,688 
76,241 
487,204 
164,488 
1,501,921 
750,961 
 
D) Drought mitigation 
 
Drought 
relief 
Total Dis-
trict Pop-
ulation 
(no. of 
pp) 
Riverine 
(rural) 
Agropas-
toral (ru-
ral) 
Pastoral 
(rural) 
Urban 
IDP (rural 
& urban) 
% JOSP 
% FCDO 
Afgoye 
505,58
7 
64,957 
238,17
5 
6,186 
166,96
5 
29,574 100% 
          
252,794  
Jowhar 
391,96
1 
97,281 
138,62
5 
7,296 
71,799 
76,960 100% 
          
195,981  
Balcad 
358,45
3 
50,691 
152,07
2 
50,691 
83,999 
21,000 100% 
          
179,227  
Merka 
264,67
9 
90,665 
16,838 
2,589 
117,63
3 
36,954 100% 
          
132,340  
Qooroley 
135,55
8 
65,293 
13,978 
9,479 
46,808 
0 
100% 
            
67,779 
TOTAL 
1,656,2
38 
303,93
0 
321,51
3 
70,055 
320,23
9 
134,91
4 
 
823,119
=== PAGE 56 ===
 
56 
 
Annex 8 - Snapshot of Jowhar Offstream Programme to which RESTORE contributes
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
57 
 
Annex 9:  DRAFT JOSP PROGRAMME GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE (as proposed by 
MoAI/MoEWR to be refined during inception phase) 
 
1.0 BACKGROUND  
 
The JOSP Project is pivotal in unlocking a developmental project that will significantly impact 
the regional economy and local livelihoods. The emphasis on improving irrigation water man-
agement, building on the inherent strengths of various stakeholders, focusing on the holistic 
development of water infrastructure, and addressing the region's unique challenges is essen-
tial. The project aims to promote food security, alleviate poverty, ensure environmental sus-
tainability, and prepare for the impacts of climate change and flood management. This sup-
ports the drive to enhance the country's resilience to the impacts of floods and droughts, and 
as such, strengthening and improving how water and natural resources are governed and 
managed is as important as the interventions to address built and ecological infrastructure. 
Hence, the initiative's commitment to supporting leaders of change, sharing knowledge, and 
fostering a community of best practices is essential for triggering widespread positive change; 
offering capacity building and technical inputs on various water management and irrigation 
management methods is valuable. This project is poised to significantly contribute to agricul-
ture water initiatives across different regional countries and basins. As such, the manner in 
which the project is governed and the lessons are leveraged will be important for future up-
scaling of approaches. 
 
The Initiative focuses on enhancing irrigation infrastructure, addressing regional challenges, 
and promoting innovative strategies in irrigation agriculture, empowering leaders and sharing 
knowledge; the Initiative aims to foster a broader movement of positive change. By offering 
capacity building and technical support on various water and irrigation techniques, the Initiative 
also supports communities in adopting best practices for agricultural water management, and 
this will be informative for other areas nationally and regionally. 
 
The JOSP, chaired by MOAI and Co-Chaired MoEWR, will work with the other development 
Partners to strengthen and regularise the water sector governance frameworks, including pol-
icy, legislation, and institutional aspects. This will take place at the national scale, and inter-
ventions such as the JOSP can be importantly supportive in providing very local-level inputs 
to that process in a ‘bottom-up’ manner that supports the national ‘top-down’ approach. 
 
2.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTORE PROJECT STEERING COMMITTEE. 
Noting that the JOSP has strategic importance to the Federal Government of Somalia and the 
Hirshabelle State Government, it will be critically important to establish a JOSP Programme 
Steering Committee (JOSP PSC) that supports and guides the implementation of the various 
interventions, as well as providing policy and strategic impact issues through to the Federal 
Government. The JOSP PSC will provide a conduit for guiding the JOSP on important shifts in 
policy and approach as guided by the high-level Strategic Oversight Committee and the Fed-
eral Government of Somalia.  Under the  JOSP  Steering Committee, a RESTORE Project 
Steering Committee (RPSC) will play a pivotal role in ensuring that the RESTORE project runs 
efficiently, with its primary duties encompassing coordination, offering recommendations, and 
providing oversight  during the project's implementation phase. Here are some potential ben-
efits and roles of a RESTORE PSC. 
 
- 
Strategic Oversight: - The RESTORE PSC provides high-level oversight on the pro-
ject, ensuring it aligns with JOSP Program Objectives and Outcomes and ensure align-
ment with the strategic priorities of the FGS and the Hirshabelle State Government.
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
58 
 
- 
Coordination and Integration: - The Committee ensures that Government line Minis-
tries and Other Partners involved in the program RESTORE Project are well-coordi-
nated in terms of project implementation and that there is a seamless flow of infor-
mation regarding progress, process, and any problems. 
- 
Decision Making: The manner in which the RESTORE PSC operates can be such 
that it can quickly address and resolve issues that may arise during the project, ensur-
ing no unnecessary delays. Developing clear Standard Operating Procedures for this 
will be important. 
- 
Risk Management: Using a risk management framework, the RESTORE PSC will reg-
ularly review the project's progress in mitigating these risks, identifying potential new 
risks early on, and devising strategies to manage these. 
- 
Stakeholder Communication: Due to the strategic importance of communications to 
various national, state, and community-level stakeholders, the RESTORE PSC pro-
vides oversight and strategic guidance to ensure clear and consistent communications 
and that stakeholder concerns are heard and addressed. 
- 
Quality Assurance: The range of interventions and complexity of the differing project 
dimensions will require technical oversight to ensure project delivery that meets quality 
requirements. The RESTORE PSC can set benchmarks and standards for the project, 
ensuring that the final deliverable meets or exceeds the set quality standards. 
- 
Resource Allocation: The Committee can oversee and ensure that human and mate-
rial resources are allocated efficiently and judiciously to various aspects of the project 
and advise, and guide adjustments required to support efficiency and effectiveness. 
- 
Reporting, Review, and Feedback: Regular reviews by the  RESTORE PSC can pro-
vide constructive feedback to the project team, helping them stay on track and make 
necessary adjustments. This needs to be underpinned by a regularized reporting pro-
tocol. This also supports the RESTORE PSC to keep the High-Level Committee and 
other key stakeholders and partners abreast of progress. 
Establishing a RESTORE PSC is essential to ensure a holistic approach to project manage-
ment and integration of the project within the JOSP program.  
 
 
3.0 COORDINATION WITH OTHER MRC PROGRAMMES  
The JOSP PSC, and the RESTORE PSC will coordinate with other relevant line Ministries, 
Donors, and UN Partners of the JOSP program to ensure more efficient and effective imple-
mentation. The JOSP PSC, in coordination Somali Resilience Coordination Forum (SRCF) 
under MoAI-FGS with the Somali Water Sector Coordination Facility (SWSCF) under MoEWR-
FGS, noted that the Integrated Water Sector Development Task Force and the Flood Control 
and Water for Irrigation Working Group will also play a key role in guiding this project. The 
lessons learned through the JOSP will need to be directed through the SRCF and SWSCF to 
support knowledge exchange and the transference of these to other projects and geographies. 
The chart below shows the project Governance Structure.  
 
Draft JOSP Governance Structure
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
59 
 
 
 
 
During the Inception Phase of the JOSP, it will be essential to undertake a process to take all 
key stakeholders through the various elements of the JOSP and to outline the various strategic 
and operational aspects that will require oversight, management, and monitoring. Engagement 
with the various key stakeholders will ensure that the program management framework is ap-
propriately structured, that the right stakeholders and actors are engaged, and that this pro-
gram management framework is operationalized. To this end, the process will map out the 
core principles underpinning the management framework and guide the operational protocols. 
This not only ensures the development of a robust management approach but also ensures 
buy-in and ownership.  
4.0 JOSP Program Governance  
The JOSP program governance for agriculture and water services in Somalia can be under-
stood as having three layers: 
1. FGS Level 
• 
The establishment of a high-level Strategic Oversight Committee provides for sen-
ior officials from the FGS, the Hirshabelle State Government, the UN Resident Co-
ordinators Office, and identified vital donors to have oversight on the overall pro-
gram and to provide strategic direction and guidance at a programmatic level. This 
committee makes links to strategic aspects of policy and strategy as well as matters 
that require political intervention. 
• 
The Program Steering Committee (JOSP PSC) primarily coordinates and oversees 
the various elements of the program, engaging with multiple projects to ensure ef-
fective and efficient delivery. 
• 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation leads the JOSP PSC at the Federal Gov-
ernance level. The co-lead will be the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources of 
the Federal Government.  
• 
JOSP PSC members within this layer include MoECC, DSS, Donors, and UN Agen-
cies. 
• 
Linkages to the SWSCF are critical through the Integrated Water Sector Develop-
ment Task Force and the Flood Control and Water for Irrigation Working Group. 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation is leading this working group. 
 
2. Federal Member States Level  
• 
A   Program Management Committee (PMC) will be established at the Federal 
Member State level, focusing on managing the implementation of projects and in-
terventions under the various programmatic streams. 
JOSP Program Man-
agement Committees  
HSS, MoAI- (MoEWR) & UN  
Strategic Oversight 
Committees  
FGS, UNRCO, Donors & UN 
Integrated water Sector 
Development Task
Resilience Coordination 
Unit  
SWSCF
SRCF
Operation & Maintenance  
Local Authorities, Water & Irriga-
tion Committees,
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
60 
 
• 
At the state level, the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, along with the co-lead 
Ministry of Energy and Water, is responsible for implementing and coordinating the 
various projects. 
• 
Water and irrigation users from the upstream and downstream can be pivotal in 
leading and managing infrastructure irrigation and water governance within their 
respective states. 
3. Local Government Level  
• 
At the local level, establishing an Operational Implementation Unit will be primarily 
responsible for managing and facilitating the day-to-day water management activi-
ties. As the various programmatic actions are implemented, the different opera-
tional protocols, roles, and responsibilities will be developed. These will be progres-
sively captured in Standard Operating Procedures. 
• 
The governance at this level is a combined effort of the regional administration, 
local authorities, and communities of water management and irrigation committees. 
• 
Many Local Governments (LGs) have significant challenges in ensuring their effec-
tiveness in governance due to potential gaps in their financial and technical capac-
ity to implement or manage water infrastructure and services. While the program 
will undertake a range of activities to build capacity, the support of the SWSCF 
Working Group, development partners, and local Non-Governmental Organisations 
will be important in giving guidance.  
5.0 Infrastructure Operation and Maintenance Challenges 
The infrastructure operation and maintenance challenges faced by Somalia in the context of 
water operations are multifaceted. Addressing these challenges requires a comprehensive and 
systemic approach.  
 
- 
Inadequate Public Funding: - A common issue in many developing countries, includ-
ing Somalia, is the need for adequate public or community funding for regular opera-
tions and maintenance (OMM) of water infrastructure; with traditional financing, it be-
comes easier to maintain and operate water facilities at their optimal levels  
- 
Low Tax Revenue: - Local governments often rely on tax revenues to fund various 
public services; due to different socio-economic and political challenges in Somalia, 
there needs to be a tax revenue collection, which means local governments often need 
to allocate sufficient funds for water OMM in their annual budgets, this may require 
external assistance from the national government, international donors, and partners 
for the short-long term support for operation and maintenance.  
- 
Shortage of locally Trained Personnel: - For any infrastructure to function effectively, 
trained personnel are crucial in the context of Somalia; there needs to be more locally 
trained personnel, making it challenging to carry out even minor routine maintenance 
on irrigation and water infrastructure, inadequate training programs, or migration of 
skilled workers to other countries. 
- 
Poor Infrastructure Design and Construction: - Infrastructure that needs to be better 
designed or constructed can pose long-term challenges; poorly constructed dams 
might not only compromise the management of water sources but can also pose risks 
to nearby communities. It's essential to ensure that infrastructure projects adhere to 
quality standards and best practices. 
- 
Lack of affordable spare parts: - The availability of spare parts is crucial for the 
smooth operation of any infrastructure in Somalia. State and federal governments will 
set committees responsible for the operational maintenance of dams or any other water 
infrastructure; it might take a long time to fix, further exacerbating the problem. 
- 
Lack of capacity building program: Capacity building is essential for any sector of 
water management committee and irrigation management from downstream and con-
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
61 
 
tinuous training programs for water source operators in Somalia. Additionally, govern-
ment officials must have more proper supervision mechanisms, which might result in 
mismanagement or corruption. 
- 
Lack of Community Ownership: - to be successful in the project in the short and long 
term, it's crucial that the local community feels a sense of ownership in the project's 
respective areas and needs a strong community sense of rights and developing water 
user guidelines of operation and maintenance irrigation and water infrastructures as 
well as societal participation is crucial to ensure the sustainability of these projects. 
This structured approach ensures top-down governance where each layer has its responsibil-
ities and roles, ensuring holistic management of irrigation and water governance in agriculture 
of the JOSP Program.  The inception phase will identify design options for governance struc-
ture, cost recovery, capacity building for JOSP operation and maintenance costs.  These will 
then be explored for feasibility with all stakeholders to determine which have greatest ac-
ceptance and potential.  The government will then make a decision on which design will be 
developed and create detail plan to do this with expert water governance technical support 
over the course of the year one.
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
62 
 
 
Annex 10 – Consortium and partnership management structures
=== PAGE 63 ===
Foreign, Commonwealth
& Development Office
Partnership structure
(RESTORE)
Partneishlö
Agreqment
MoEWR
(RESTORE
ministry lead)
Service provider
contract
Pegasus
and/or
TBC
2
UKaid
from the British
FCDO (Resource
Partner)
Finahcing
Agreement
FAO (Programme
lead and main award
recipient)
IJN to IJN
¯ ÄSréeFnéät- ¯ ¯ - r
IOM
Partners@ip_
Agreement
MoAl co-
implementer),
overall JOSP
lead ministry
at PSC level
IJN to IJN
-AZ rééröeht-
UNEP
UNEP DHI
I Service provider
contract
GIST, Berghoff
Foundation
Service provider
contract
Partnership
- ÄSréément
WVI-s
Partnership
Agreement
MoECC (policy
advisory role)
Outcome 1
Additional downstream implementing partners to be selected in accordance with competitive
procedures by upstream partners
63
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
64 
 
Annex 11 – JOSP Theory of Change (see attached JPEG file)
