=== PAGE 1 ===
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
National 
Food 
Security 
Policy 
December 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Irrigation, 
Federal Government of 
Somalia 
SOMALIA
=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
iii 
Table of Contents 
Foreword 
v 
Abbreviations 
vi 
Executive Summary 
1 
Section1. Introduction and Background 
3 
1.1. Country Context and Background 
3 
1.1.1. 
Location and Geography 
3 
1.1.2. 
Administrative framework 
3 
1.1.3. 
Population 
3 
1.1.4. 
Climate, temperature, and rainfall 
3 
1.1.1. 
Economy, poverty, and unemployment 
4 
1.2. Overview of the Productive Sector (Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries) 
4 
1.2.1. 
Agriculture sector 
5 
1.2.2. 
Livestock sector 
5 
1.2.3. 
Fisheries sector 
6 
1.3. Overview of Trade and Market Access 
8 
1.3.1. 
Foreign trade 
8 
1.3.2. 
Imports 
9 
1.3.3. 
Domestic market infrastructure and linkages 
9 
1.3.4. 
The private sector in creating employment, jobs and raising incomes 
9 
1.4. Overview of Food Security and Nutrition Security Situation 
10 
1.4.1. 
Food Security and Nutrition situation 
10 
1.4.2. 
Underlying Causes of food and nutrition insecurity 
11 
Section 2. National Food Security and Nutrition Policy Framework 
16 
2.1. Food Security Conceptual Framework 
16 
2.2. Rationale 
16 
2.3. Policy Goal and Objective 
17 
2.4. Guiding principles 
17 
Section 3: Main Policy Issues, Objectives, Statements, and Measures 
19 
3.1. 
Food Availability 
19 
3.2. 
Access to Food 
23 
3.3. 
Food utilization and nutrition improvement 
25 
3.4. 
Stability of food availability access and utilization 
28 
Section 4: Policies supporting Food Security and Nutrition 
30 
4.1. 
Food Safety, standards, and quality control 
30 
4.2. 
Food storage, processing, preservation, and value addition 
32 
4.3. 
Humanitarian food aid management 
34 
4.4. 
National Agricultural Research and Extension Services 
35 
4.5. 
Reduction of Khat consumption 
38 
4.6. 
Conflict management and peace building 
40 
4.7. 
Land Tenure 
41 
4.8. 
Strategic Food Reserve 
43
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
Section 5. Policies on cross-cutting Issues 
46 
5.1. 
Building Resilience to multiple shocks 
46 
5.2. 
Gender Issues in Food Security 
47 
5.3. 
Food Security and Nutrition Data and Information management 
48 
5.4. 
Capacity Development 
49 
5.5. 
Climate Change 
49 
Section 6 Policy Implementation 
53 
6.1. Formulation of implementation arrangements 
53 
6.2. Institutional Framework 
53 
6.3. Legal Framework 
54 
6.4. Financing and Resource mobilisation 
55 
6.5. Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting 
55 
6.5.1. 
Monitoring of policy implementation 
55 
6.5.2. 
Evaluation 
55 
6.5.3. 
Reporting 
55 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
iv
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
FOREWORD 
Achieving food and nutritional security has been one of the goals of the National Development Plan- 
(NDP-9) of federal government of Somalia. To  this end, this National Food Security Policy (NFSP)  has 
recommended actions/interventions needed to sustain this position and innovative multi-sector and 
sector-specific policies that will ensure that food and nutritional improvement remains everyone’s 
commitment in Somalia. This policy is based on the recommendation of National Development Plan 
2020-2024 as well as the outcome of the National Conference on Food Security and Agriculture 
Development that was conducted in Mogadishu by the MoAI of the federal government during the 23- 
25th January 2018 which brought together participants from the most import stakeholders engaged in 
food security activities in Somalia including Federal State Members government senior officials. 
This policy has sufficiently described the past and current status and framework of food security in line 
with the internationally accepted definition of food security “Food security is achieved when all people at 
all times have physical and economic access to sufficient safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary 
needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life”. The policy is based on the four key pillars for 
food and nutrition security namely: Food Availability; Food Access; Food Utilization and Stability of food 
supply, access and utilization. The policy has identified and articulated key policy measures/intervention 
which will serve as the basis for the formulation of National Food and Nutrition Security Strategy or 
Action Plan. 
It gives much pleasure that the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation of the Federal Government of 
Somalia is releasing the first comprehensive National Food Security Policy document since the 
independence of Somalia. I strongly believe that any policy or program of food and nutrition security can 
only be successful if it is based on relevant policy measures. These Policy measures encompass various 
sectors including agriculture, livestock and fisheries as well as socio-economic sectors including health, 
water and sanitation, infrastructure, trade and humanitarian assistance. 
I am confident that this national food security policy will address the challenges of achieving food    and 
nutritional security in Somalia if all food and nutrition security stakeholders work closely with the 
production ministries (Ministry of Agriculture, ministry of livestock, and ministry of fisheries). 
I would like to remind all stakeholders that the formulation of this policy is only the first step to addressing 
food and nutrition insecurity and it is not an end by itself. The successful implementation of this policy, 
to achieve food and nutrition security, requires the formulation of a National Food and Nutrition Security 
Strategy and Action Plan; which will be developed through a consultative and participatory process 
involving all stakeholders including development partners and donors as soon as this Policy is endorsed 
by the government. It is only when we have such a Strategy and Action Plan, which is fully funded by the 
government and its partners and donors, that we shall implement those policy measures/interventions 
and achieve food and nutrition security both at the household and national level. 
The Ministry of agriculture and irrigation acknowledges and appreciates the technical and financial 
support provided by FAO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of The United Nations and the 
European Union (EU). I would also like to congratulate the advisors of the MoAI for the developing and 
laying a strong foundation for this food security policy document. I would also express my sincere thanks 
to various federal government institutions like Ministry of livestock, ministry of fisheries and marine 
resources and ministry of humanitarian and disaster management at both federal and member state 
level, and international organizations for providing valuable inputs in finalizing this document 
Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation 
Federal Government of Somalia 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
v
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AU 
African Union 
CAADP 
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development 
CFS 
Committee on World Food Security 
COMESA 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
CPP: 
Country Program Paper 
CSA 
Climate Smart Agriculture 
DFID 
Department for International Department 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN) 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investment 
FEWS NET Famine Early warning System Network 
FGS 
Federal Government Somalia 
FSN 
Food Security and Nutrition 
FSNAU 
Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GMO 
Genetically modified Organisms 
GSF 
Global Strategic Framework (for Food Security and Nutrition Security) 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiatives 
ICRISAT 
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
IDDRSIIGAD Drought Disaster Resilience Sustainability Initiative 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced People 
IGAD 
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development 
IFAD 
International Fund for Agriculture Development 
IUU 
Illegal Unreported Unregulated 
LNGO 
Local Non-Government Organizations 
MoA 
Ministry of Agriculture 
MoAI 
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 
MOH 
Ministry Of Health 
MOPIED 
Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development 
MT 
Metric Tone 
NDP 
National Development Plan-9 (2024) 
NEPAD 
New Partnership for African Development 
NFSP 
National Food Security Policy 
NGO 
Non-Government Organization 
OCHA 
United Nation Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
ODA: 
Overseas Development Assistance 
OIE 
World Organization for Animal Health 
PESS 
Population Estimation Survey of Somalia 
RRF 
Recovery and Resilience Framework 
SAM 
Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SATG 
Somali Agriculture Technical Group 
SDC 
Swiss Development Cooperation 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SPS 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
T&V 
Training and Visit 
UNFCCC 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF 
United Nation Children Fund 
UNFPA 
United Nation Population Fund 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
vi
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
Executive Summary 
The National Food Security Policy (NFSP) is the outcome of the National Conference on Food Security 
and Agriculture Development that was conducted in Mogadishu by the MoAI of the federal government 
during the 23-25th January 2018 which brought together participants from the most import stakeholders 
engaged in Food Security and Nutrition activities in Somalia including Federal State Members 
government senior officials. It is aligned with NDP 9, other sector and sub-sector policies and 
strategies of the Somalia Federal Government and selected member State governments. 
Despite the fact that Somalia has been experiencing food insecurity for a very long time, it lacked a 
national Food Security Policy and a National institutional framework to effectively liberate its people 
from both forms of food and nutrition insecurity: chronic and acute food insecurity. 
Somalia is gradually transiting from insecurity and emergencies towards peace and stability, paving 
the way for the development of long-term policies and strategies of the productive and socio-economic 
sectors contributing to achieving Food Security and Nutrition. This presents opportunities to identify 
and prioritize investment potentials available from the Federal Government of Somalia, the domestic 
private sector, Foreign Direct Investment, Overseas Development Assistance, and international and 
regional organizations such as IGAD, COMESA, and AU. Furthermore, the Government of Somalia 
continues to work in partnership with UN Agencies and many stakeholders at national and local levels 
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, as these SDGs will provide the foundation for 
the Government’s development efforts up to the year 2030. 
The main purpose of the Policy is to declare government intention and commitments as well as to 
guide its institutions (at all levels); development partners, and other key stakeholders in their efforts to 
address food insecurity and malnutrition. This Policy has identified a number of specific policy 
objectives, policy statements (government declaration of intent), and policy measures on the basis of 
the Food Security conceptual framework to ensure the Overall Policy Goal is realized. 
This Policy document is organized under six sections: Section 1 presents introduction and background 
data and information: country background; overview of productive sector (agriculture, livestock, and 
fisheries); overview of trade and market access; and overview of Food Security and Nutrition situation. 
Section 2 presents the Policy Framework where it defines the rationale, goal, overall objective, and 
guiding principles of the Policy. The Policy Goal is to achieve food security and improved nutrition    at 
national and household levels. Achieving this goal requires that adequate quantity of safe and 
nutritionally acceptable food is available at affordable prices and at any place and at all times, to all 
the people of Somalia, particularly, to the most vulnerable, women and children as specified under the 
NDP- 9 (2020-2024). Guiding principles of the Policy, including key international and Africa regional 
instruments to which the Policy should be aligned with are also described under this section. 
Section 3 presents the core policy issues which are built around the four pillars of Food Security: food 
availability, access to food, food utilization, and stability of food supply, access and utilization. For each 
pillar, the context, past and present, is described; specific policy objectives are defined; policy 
statements reflecting government intention and commitments are articulated; and policy measures are 
identified to address the core challenges and constraints under each pillar. 
Section 4 is designed to attract the attention of senior government decision makers and development 
partners on the need to formulate stand-alone policies or regulations which are currently lacking despite 
their relevance to achieving Food Security and Nutrition. These include food safety, standards, and 
quality control; food storage, processing, and value addition; humanitarian aid management; research 
and extension; Khat consumption; and conflict management and peace building; land tenure security, 
and strategic food reserve. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
Section 5 addresses cross-cutting issues which national Food Security and Nutrition policies and 
strategies must consider in planning and implementation of specific programs and projects. These 
cross-cutting issues include: building resilience to multiple shocks, food security data and information 
management, gender issues in food security and nutrition, capacity development, and climate change. 
Section 6 is the last section and describes policy implementation requirements including formulation 
of National Food Security Strategic Plan or Action Plan, institutional and legal framework, financing 
and resource mobilization; and monitoring and evaluation issues. The main priority issues for the 
implementation of this policy are the establishment of the “Food Security Commission and the 
formulation of the National Food Security Strategic Plan or Action Plan. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
Section 1: Introduction and Background 
1.1. Country Context and Background 
1.1.1. Location, geography and topography 
Somalia is located in the horn of Africa and is 
bordered by Kenya to the southwest, Ethiopia to the 
west and Djibouti to the far northwest in the Gulf of 
Aden. It lies between latitudes 2°S and 12°N, and 
longitudes 41° and 52°E. Strategically located at 
the mouth of the Bab el Mandeb gateway to the Red 
Sea and the Suez Canal, the country occupies the 
tip of a region. Somalia’s total land area is 637,660 
km2 of which 30% is classified as desert land that is 
unsuitable for agricultural production, 45% is covered 
by rangelands suitable for livestock grazing, 14% is 
covered by forest or woodland, and the remaining 
13% (8.1 million ha) is classified as arable land 
(Food and Agriculture Organization,1995). There 
are two main rivers in Somalia namely; the Juba 
and Shabelle. Both of them run from the Ethiopian 
Highlands south-easterly across Somalia to the 
Indian Ocean. The topography of the country 
consists of mainly of plateau that slopes to the 
Indian Ocean in the east and to the Gulf of Aden in the north. 
1.1.1. Administrative Framework 
The Federal Republic of Somalia officially consist of six federal member states namely Galmudug, 
Hirshabelle, Jubaland, Southwest, Puntland, and the municipality of Benadir. The country is further 
subdivided into 18 regions and 95 districts. The member states originated from the previous eighteen 
administrative regions. 
1.1.2. Population 
The world population review estimated that current (2020) population of Somalia is 15.89 million. 
Somalia’s population growth rate is 2.92% and fertility rate is extremely high at 6.12 births per woman1. 
1.1.3. Climate, temperature, and rainfall 
The climate of Somalia varies markedly within the different parts of the country and can accordingly 
be subdivided into the three major climatic zones namely: a) Mountainous north-western part with mild 
semi-Mediterranean climate and annual precipitation of up to 400 mm; b) A central and north-eastern 
zone with a hot and arid climate and low annual rainfall of between 100-200 mm each year; and c) A 
southern part with an annual rainfall of up to 600 mm in which most of the settled farming is practiced. 
Somalia has four main seasons namely: (1) The Gu rainy season (April to June) with average annual 
rainfall of 100mm and 600mm; (2) The dry and hot season (Hagaa season) which occurs in the months 
of July to September and characterized by low temperatures of up to 150C in the highlands of 
Somaliland and 20-300C in south central regions; (3) The Deyr season (autumn) season which occurs 
in October to November and characterized by low rains; (4) Jilaal (winter) season occurs in December 
to March. Rainfall is highly variable and hence unreliable. The southern regions of Somalia receive 
1 Somalia 2020 population is estimated at 15,893,222 people at mid-year according to UN data (https://www.worldometers.info/ 
world-population/somalia-population/ 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
3
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
the highest annual rainfall followed by western regions of Somaliland that receive between 500mm- 
600mm. Traditionally, the Somali community relies on the long GU rains and the shorter Deyr seasons 
rain for agricultural production, pasture regeneration and replenishment of rivers, dams and ground 
water supply. But due to climate changes in the Horn of Africa, the importance of the two seasons  for 
agricultural production in Somalia has changed. For instance, in 2011, the pattern was reversed, and 
the Deyr harvest accounted for approximately 80 per cent of the yearly agricultural production. 
Similarly, since nearly two decades; the country received the heaviest rainfall in 2019 Deyr season 
(October-December). 
1.1.4. Economy, poverty and unemployment 
In spite the civil conflict and the devastating impact of the 2016-2017 drought, Somalia‘s GDP has 
been growing at average rate of 2.5 per cent in 2017 and 2.8% in 2018. According to the African 
Development Bank, the GDP growth rate of Somalia was projected to be 3.2% in 2020 and 3.5%     in 
2021 due to the improving security situation, normalization of relations with international financial 
institutions, and prospects of debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative (HIPC) in 
2020 which present opportunities to address economic and social challenges2. The World Bank also 
estimates that Somalia’s per capita income is USD 435, which makes it the fifth poorest country in the 
world3. However, due to unexpected triple shocks of locust damage, Covid-19, and flooding; GDP 
growth rate and per capita income will become much lower than the projected figures. Multiple effects 
of the triple shocks will likely continue throughout the remaining periods of 2020 and beyond. 
The World Bank estimates that poverty levels in Somalia are extremely high with about half of the 
population (51.6%) living below the poverty line. The incidence of poverty is more pronounced in IDP 
camps and rural areas. Poverty is aggravated by the lack of an effectively functioning government 
institution, widespread insecurity, and natural disasters like floods and droughts coupled with the high 
increase of population rate due to the high fertility rate that posed significant challenges to reducing 
the levels of poverty in Somalia4. In addition to this, the unemployment rate of youth is estimated     to 
be 67% that is the highest number in the world. The high levels of unemployment increased the 
vulnerability of youth to militant groups and other criminal activities and their tendency to migrate to 
other parts of the world including African countries, Europe, Asia and the Middle East5. 
The NDP-9 M&E framework has an aspirational target of a 20% decrease in poverty rates. During this 
five year time frame the poverty reduction will be dependent on increased employment and income 
levels of 10% per capita. This target is based on early and effective investment in economic growth and 
employment as supported by an improved enabling economic environment, more effective regulation, 
increased external confidence by investors, and investment in key economic sectors6. The target     is 
based on research conducted by DFID in 2008 which it found using comparative studies across 
dozens of developing countries that a 10 percent rise in income would lead to a 20-30 percent drop in 
poverty (another comparative analysis showed for every one percent rise in average income there was 
a drop of 1.7 percent in national poverty rates). 
1.2. Overview of the Productive Sector (Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries) 
The food security and nutrition situation in Somalia is highly dependent on the performance of the 
productive sectors (crop, livestock and fisheries); it is therefore pertinent to present an overview of 
their performance and their relative contribution to achieving food security at household and national 
level. 
2 African Development Bank group(https://www.afdb.org/en/countries-east-africa-somalia/somalia-economic-outlook) 
3 The Somalia High Frequency Survey (2016) estimates that the richest 20% of the population consumes seven times more than 
the bottom 20% 
4 The United Nations Population Fund (UNPF) 
5 African Development Bank Group-Somalia 2017-2020 
6 NDP -9 P333 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
1.2.1. The Agriculture sector 
Before the civil war, Agriculture sector (the crop subsector) was the second-largest contributor to GDP 
and exports, after livestock and still remains as crucial factor for food security and livelihood for riverine 
and agro-pastoral although its contribution to the economy is much smaller than it was before the war. 
Over the past three decades, the volume of cereal production declined by almost 60 percent from its 
1989 peak7 . With an estimated 8.1 million hectares of fertile lands around the Shabelle and Juba rivers 
and surrounding regions, farming has the potential not only to cover domestic food demand, but also 
to play an important role in the export market. Due to lack of technologies, inputs, and other factors, 
production and productivity have remained far below the potential and the regional average yields8 
Commercial small- and medium-scale irrigated farms produce commercial crops such as banana, 
lemon, grapefruit, mango, papaya, and other vegetables and fruits located alongside the two main rivers 
(Shabelle and Juba) whereas cereal crops such as sorghum and maize and cowpea are produced in 
rain fed areas. 
Although some recovery has been made during the past two decades, the agriculture sector is still 
characterized by low productivity due to recurring droughts, floods, collapse of the country’s technical 
memories (agricultural research centers and training extension services); destruction of irrigation 
infrastructure and pest and disease infestation. Other constraints in the agriculture sector include 
inadequate access to agricultural inputs (mainly, fertilizer, improved seeds, and pesticides), lack of 
access to credit by smallholders, poor irrigation infrastructure, the lack of application of improved 
agricultural production practices. 
The Federal Government is committed to create an enabling environment for private sector to participate 
in production and commercial activities; for example, in the areas of fertilizer, seed, agricultural & agro-
processing machinery, and pesticide importation and distribution. There is great potential that if 
appropriately exploited, will significantly improve agricultural production and increase its contribution to 
the national economy and household food security. This will also improve efficient use of the public 
resources, accelerate diversification, enhance domestic competitiveness and effectively contribute to 
national development by ensuring national food security, poverty reduction and improving the standards 
of living of Somali population. 
Implications for food security: The agriculture sector is the major contributor to food security as it 
provides between 30-50% of the country’s cereal requirements from domestic production. According 
to FAO, smallholder farming accounts for 80 per cent of total crop output and 70 per cent of marketed 
agricultural produce. On the other side, due to the challenges and constraints suppressing the 
agriculture sector as discussed above; more than 60% of cereal and grain requirement of the country 
is imported from the outside. Therefore, the agriculture sector development should be central to any 
future national and international interventions aimed at addressing the food and nutrition insecurity in 
Somalia as well as tackling the widespread poverty which is the prime driver of resource based social 
conflicts. In addition, this sector should focus also on repair and rehabilitation of irrigation systems 
damaged by conflict or poor maintenance, as well as on-farm buildings and structures and on creating 
a more productive, climate smart and resilient agricultural production system nation-wide. 
1.2.2. Livestock sector 
The livestock sector is the largest sector of the economy, the largest employer in rural areas with 
nomadic cultures, and the main driver of exports.  The Livestock sector is the source of livelihood   for 
pastoralists, contributes to Government revenues, and provides employment to a wide range of 
professionals and other service providers. According to NDP 2017-2019, the sector provides job 
opportunities for over 55% of the total labor force, plus indirect employment for another large segment 
of the labor force along the livestock value chains. The economic contribution of livestock production 
7 Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia(World Bank and FAO,2019) 
8 NDP-9 (2020-2024) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
surpasses crop production and accounts more than 60% of the gross domestic product (GDP) and 
about three-fifths of Somalia‘s foreign exchange earnings, while crop production contributes less than 
20% of the GDP. 
The livestock population in Somalia is estimated to be 39.5 million animal heads, of which 13.9 million 
are sheep, 13.2 million goats, 7.1 million camels and 5.3 million cattle9. Livestock marketing and trade 
also generate revenues for local administrations, through taxation of livestock destined for trade. The 
livestock exportation rate has increased in the last five years, as Somalia exported 4,753,070 animal 
heads in 2011, 4,833,135 in 2013, 5 million in 2014 and 5.3 million in 2015, injecting more than $ 360M 
and $ 384M in 2014 and 2015 respectively. However, the livestock export trade is constrained by the 
chronic and persistent shocks afflicting Somalia including political instability, conflict, civilian 
displacement, cyclic droughts, floods and outbreaks of Trans-boundary animal diseases within Somalia 
and in the neighboring countries. 
The other main challenges and constraints in livestock sector include: 
 Collapse of public and private sector infrastructure including ministry headquarters, specialized 
institutions, laboratories, research centers, livestock export and production and processing 
infrastructure; 
 Weak institutional capacity, 
 Lack of central coordination, enforcement of regulations, codes and standards and limited qualified 
human resources in this sector; 
 Pastoralists face continuously natural and climactic shocks (droughts, floods, range degradation 
and low rainfall) and livestock diseases including trans-boundary threats. 
 Absence of fodder reserves and alternatives for fodder/feed during dry and lean seasons which led 
to a large number of animal losses annually; 
 Low budget allocated by the government to the livestock sector. 
 Low investment from the private sector and limited budget support from the donors to the livestock 
development programs. 
 The country livestock chain and quarantines are controlled and managed by foreign investors and 
there is a need to make it under the Somali control. 
Despite the potential for increased production and distribution as well as the demand by the growing 
urban population, meat and milk processing and marketing have not developed to take these 
advantages. Therefore, any future national and sectoral plans and strategies including food security, 
foreign trade, resilience building and poverty reduction should try to address those constraints and 
challenges 
Implications for food security: strengthening the livestock sector by gradually addressing the challenges 
and constraints of the sector discussed above will significantly improve access to meat and milk, 
increase availability of labor market for the poorest households as well as increased income and 
purchasing power of pastoralists and agro-pastoralist; increase foreign livestock trade, brining in the 
much needed foreign exchange. 
1.2.3. Fisheries sector 
Somalia has the longest coastline of continental Africa, approximately 3,333 km extending from the 
western passage of the Gulf of Aden to the Indian Ocean up to the border with Kenya. Fishing industry 
in Somalia has a potential to contribute to Somalia’s economic development and poverty reduction. 
Despite the country’s rich fishing grounds; coastal fishing has remained small-scale and artisanal while 
foreign commercial vessels have enjoyed both legal and illegal harvesting offshore10. USAID 
estimated the value of the domestic fisheries sector to the Somali economy was US$135 
9 FAOSTAT 2016 
10 FAO/World Bank, 2018. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
6
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
million in 2015/1611. The value of Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing was estimated to 
contribute US$306 million in benefits to other economies, highlighting opportunities for this sector to 
better support Somali enterprises and livelihoods in the future. 
Somalia does not have policies and management plans in place nor does it have the means to manage 
its marine resources. There is no infrastructure to support the artisanal fishing industry with gear and 
equipment and the marketing chain is rudimentary in most places. On the other hand, the cultural 
preference for livestock meat instead of fish meat is dominant phenomenon in Somalia. Due to this 
reason, the importance of fisheries for food security in Somalia is relatively minor at a national 
aggregated level. Nowadays, domestic fish price is relatively very expensive in Somalia compared to 
the red meat. This can be attributed to the rapid development of hotels in big towns and returning of 
many Diaspora from the outside of the country. Rebuilding storage and marketing facilities; improving 
transportation infrastructure and equipment; and the training of fisher folks on fish processing and 
handling are some factors that could promote the role of fisheries in food security in the country. 
Some fisheries products are ideal sources of export earnings while other products are consumed 
locally (export substitution). Exports of value‐added products generate higher earnings while at the 
same time help create new ventures thus creating new jobs for unemployed youth and women. 
Development of a fisheries export segment of high value species such as lobster and tuna could create 
new sources of foreign exchange. Fish export to Europe, USA and Japan generate high revenues, but 
the requirements could be demanding and time consuming. Somalia can market fish products in the 
region. The Middle East and next door Ethiopia with over 110 million people and growing urban centres 
is potential market for Somalia’s fish products12. 
Increased fish consumption is partly a solution to improved nutrition and should be encouraged. For 
fish to be embraced as a common food on par with the traditionally common meat, it is essential to 
introduce and familiarize it as healthy and as alternative to meat. First has to be easily accessible and 
qualitatively attractive. It has to be promoted as a domestic product and a source of food security 
because it is available in large quantities in Somalia’s vast waters.13 
The main challenges and constraints in the fishing sector include: 
 Absence of a sectoral policy and plan and inadequate fisheries legal framework and regulations; 
 Inadequate landing facilities, with little or no provision of ice or hygienic handling facilities; 
 Very high post-harvest losses, with a negative consumer perception of fish quality due to the poor 
handling and short shelf life; 
 Poor domestic fresh fish consumption due to poor infrastructure and cultural practices which has 
restricted access to fish for a large portion of the population; 
 Lack of reliable data and a data collection systems to assess the status of fisheries stocks in both 
Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden; 
 Lack of technical experience among youth to actively participate and increase employment in the 
private sector (fishing, engine repair, boat building, fish handling etc.); and 
 Limited private sector investment. 
Implications for food security: investments to improve the fisheries sector in general as well as 
addressing challenges and constraints of the sector described above will significantly increase incomes 
of rural people, creates jobs to the ever-increasing number of unemployed youth, while improving 
nutrition of urban consumers, addressing a big gap in food security and nutrition. 
11 
12 NDP-9; Fisheries sector 
13 Improving Development and Management of Somalia’s Marine Fisheries and Controlling Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated 
(IUU) Fishing POLICY PAPER Prepared by: Trans‐Africa Consultancy Services for African Development Solutions February 2015 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
7
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
1.3. Overview of trade and market access 
1.3.1. Foreign trade 
Exports of Somalia are dominated by livestock trade that accounted for 80% of the Somali total 
exports14 followed by charcoal, fish and hides and skins. This included 4.6 million goats and sheep, 
340,000 cattle and 77,000 camels that valued conservatively at around US$360 million (Figure 1)15. 
Figure 1: Total annual trend of livestock export in Somalia during the 2009-2014. Source: FAO, 2015 
The country’s trade deficit was financed through remittances (equivalent to 41 percent of GDP) and 
direct donor support (equivalent to 9 percent of GDP). These deficits signal important opportunities for 
Somalia to produce sustainably for the domestic economy and boost trade relations locally as well as 
internationally. 
The top agricultural products that Somalia exports to the outside world include sesame, banana, lemon 
and frankincense. Fisheries constitute the third largest exports in Somalia. Landings at present are 
estimated at 15,000 to 20,000 MT a year. Fisheries employ some 30,000persons full time and 60,000 
part-time workers in the form of traders, processors, and gear and vessel manufacturers. Total 
economic value of domestic fisheries, after value is added through the supply chain is US$135 million 
per year16. 
To revamp the trade sector, NDP 9 asserts that building a more diverse and competitive economy 
capable of taking advantage of emerging regional trade opportunities is the best route to broadening 
growth and mobilizing revenue in the medium to long term. The government will therefore promote 
investment in trade corridors linking Somali ports to neighboring countries, while developing a strategy 
to encourage labor-intensive industries along these corridors. 
1.3.2. Imports 
The most common imported food commodities in Somalia are raw sugar, rice, pasta (spaghetti), wheat 
flour, tea, powder milk and cooking oil. These imported foodstuffs are expensive and beyond the 
means of majority of the population. In 2017 Somalia imported $2.23 Billion, making it the 149th largest 
importer in the world. During the last five years the imports of Somalia have increased at an 
 
14 Somali national development plan-2017-2019 (page,49) 
15 https://www.eabjournal.com/agriculture-east-africa-business-journal/603-investment-opportunities-in-the-agriculture-sector.html 
16 NDP – 8 (207-2019) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
8
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
annualized rate of 16.1%, from $1.06 billion in 2012 to $2.23 billion in 2017. The most recent imports 
are led by Raw Sugar which represent 11.8% of the total imports of Somalia, followed by Rice, which 
account for 7.41%17. 
Other agro-based imports include inorganic fertilizers, pesticides, livestock medicines, fishing 
equipment, agricultural implements and machinery, etc. Nowadays, the Somali traders started to 
import chicken, eggs, onions, tomatoes and orange, apple and orange from the outside in spite there 
is potential opportunity to locally produce these products. It is worth to mention that 100% of the 
chickens consumed in the country are imported from the outside. 
Investments in irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and the reconstruction of Mareerey Juba Sugar 
Factory, Jowhar Sugar Factory and Farm, and rice farms could potentially reduce sugar and rice 
imports while creating jobs to thousands of people. 
1.3.3. Domestic rural infrastructure and market linkages 
The country’s dilapidated infrastructure and poor road networks have undermined the efficiency of 
domestic trade, particularly the supply of agricultural, dairy, and fisheries products to urban areas and 
towns where potential customers with purchasing power are available. The urban growing population 
with its relatively better spending capacity should be exploited as an arena for rural producers of 
agricultural products. Improved market linkages between rural producers and urban consumers could 
provide tremendous opportunities for improving terms of trade, market efficiencies, increasing rural 
incomes, and job creation. 
Nomadic pastoralists who are often considered as having little connection to markets are in practice 
relying on rural markets for the purchase of cereals. Strengthening market access to them will not only 
facilitate their access to food but also provide business to traders. Furthermore, market linkages will 
also improve the diversity and quantity of food especially protein and fats from meat, milk, and fish  to 
urban consumers. Recently, however, the domestic market supply chains and household food and 
income sources particularly household income from remittances was worsened by the impact of the 
Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic (UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs -OCHA)18. 
Transport is a key infrastructure subsector that directly enhances productivity and living standards.   It 
creates employment while being built and maintained and contributes to improved security and 
stabilisation. The current poor status of transport infrastructure severely limits access to markets and 
services across the regions of the country and internationally. This includes roads, ports and airports. 
For example, poor road transport infrastructure has been highlighted during consultations across the 
regions as one the barriers to trade and access to employment opportunities, especially among farming 
communities in districts around main markets of Mogadishu, regional capitals and major towns19. 
1.3.4. The role of the private sector in creating employment, jobs and raising incomes 
The conflict that occurred in the country led to the privatization of many services previously provided 
by the public sector. The resilience of the Somali private sector in a fragile environment is impressive in 
many respects; consequently, it has become the leading provider of telecommunications, air transport, 
money transfer, urban water, electricity, and social services. Other factors that supported the recovery 
of the economy include remittances sent by skilled diaspora; traditional institutions based on clan 
networks, which provided some degree of secured property rights and contract enforcement, even in 
conflict-affected southern Somalia; and a thriving, though informal, regional trade, which provided a 
new source of income. 
17 https://tradecouncil.org/somalia-economic-statistics-2019/ 
18 This challenges can represent also an excellent opportunity for the agriculture sector to grow if the rural and urban economies 
are developed in a sustainably integrated manner to harness potential complementarities and synergies 
19 NDP -9 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
9
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The private sector, in partnership with government can create jobs in several productive sector farms. 
For example, rehabilitation of Mareerey Juba Sugar Factory, Jowhar Sugar Factory and Farm, and 
rice farms will be able to create jobs and employ thousands of people including youth and women 
In view of its role, government needs to improve and modernize the business sectors for effective 
partnership and contribution of the private sector. In 2020, for example, Somalia ranked the 190 among 
190 economies in the ease of doing business, according to the latest World Bank annual ratings20. The 
rank of Somalia was the same in the years 2019 and 2018 at 190 of 190. Doing business survey covers 
10 areas of business regulations, which include: starting a business, dealing with construction permits, 
getting electricity, registering a property, accessing credit, protecting minority investors, paying taxes, 
trading across borders, enforcing contracts, and resolving insolvency. 
The Federal Government need to take immediate steps to improve the business operational 
environment including easing the arduous bureaucratic chain for new and ongoing business for its 
own strategic benefits. To this end, the short term strategy under NDP 9 which aims at creating an 
enabling environment for the private sector, to promote increased growth, increased employment and 
increased competition is commendable 
According to NDP-9 stakeholder consultations, the private sector views improved security and rule of 
law as its highest priorities, along with improvements to the country’s energy and transport infrastructure 
upon which internal trade so much depends. 
1.4. Overview of Food and Nutrition Security Situation 
1.4.1. Food Security and Nutrition situation 
The overview of productive sectors in the preceding sections indicates the reduction of domestic crop 
production, which has led to a massive increase in food imports. At the same time there has been a 
combination of increased domestic food demand driven by rapid population growth and urbanization 
with consumption largely financed by remittances. Despite widespread livestock ownership among 
Somalis, most households have a diet composed more of cereals (a mix of home-grown sorghum and 
maize and imported rice and various wheat derivatives) and sugar and oil (also imported). 
The level of acute food insecurity has increased significantly since the beginning of 2020. The severely 
acute food insecure people were about 1.1 million by early 2020, as determined by the post Dyer 
seasonal assessment result. This figure increased and is projected to reach 3.5 million. 
Multiple shocks such as desert locusts, flooding, COVID-19 and impact of previous shocks contributed 
for the reported increase of acute food insecurity21. 
According to FSNAU quarterly report on the 2020 Jiaal Impact and Gu Season Early Warning, an 
estimated of 2.7 million people across Somalia are expected to face food insecurity Crisis or worse 
(IPC Phase 3 or higher) during the April and June. An additional 2.9 million people are expected     to 
be Stressed (IPC Phase 2), bringing the total number of people facing acute food insecurity to 
5.6 million. According to this report, it is expected that the total number of people facing acute food 
insecurity across Somalia will reach to 6.4 million during July and September 2020. In terms of impact 
on different social groups, on average, rural (e.g. pastoralists) and displaced populations account for 
most of the people classified in Crisis (IPC 3) or higher22 
High levels of acute malnutrition continue to persist due to several factors, including high morbidity, 
below sphere immunization and Vitamin-A supplementation, poor childcare practices, inadequate 
access to clean/safe drinking water and acute food insecurity. Furthermore, the country is facing 
20 World Bank. 2020. Doing Business 2020. Washington, DC: World Bank. DOI:10.1596/978-1-4648-1440-2. 
21 Revised Humanitarian Response Plan, UN OCHA July 2020 
22 ile:///C:/Users/hp/Downloads/FSNAU-Quarterly-Brief-May-2020.pdf 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
10
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
Triple Threat of Desert Locust, flooding’s and the global pandemic COVID-19 contributing towards the 
deterioration of production outputs, social economics with increasing vulnerabilities of households. 
These culminations result in impact on the states of acute malnutrition situation affecting children and 
women23. 
The nutritional status of Somali children is relatively poor due to many reasons, such as low economic 
conditions, and severe drought that has affected the country in recent years. Under-nourished children 
are usually associated with high mortality and morbidity rates. Additionally, nutritional deficit also hinders 
children’s long-term physical and mental development. According to SHDS (2020), 28% percent of 
children under the age of five are stunted or too short for their age, and 17 percent are severely stunted, 
while 12 percent are wasted and 6 percent of the children are severely wasted. 23% percent of children 
under the age of five are underweight, with 12 percent severely underweight24. In addition, The Somalia 
Nutation Cluster (Jan-June 2020) report indicates that the median Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) 
prevalence has remained Serious (10–14.9%) for the past three consecutive seasons (13.1% in 
2019/20 Deyr, 13.8% in 2019 Gu and 12.6 % in 2018/19 Deyr). The majority of women in Somalia lack 
access to social services and have inadequate awareness of health programs. Malnutrition among 
lactating women also contributes to low levels of breastfeeding, which in turn impacts on the immune 
status of the children. IDPs are the most vulnerable group in malnutrition followed by the pastoralist. 
1.4.2. Underlying Causes of food insecurity and malnutrition 
The main underlying causes of food insecurity, according to several studies and reports, include 
widespread poverty, conflict-induced insecurity, recurrent climatic shocks (recurrent &severe droughts 
and floods), displacement, low agricultural production and productivity (of crops, livestock and fisheries), 
inadequate access to markets and market linkages, inadequate access to clean water and sanitation 
facilities, and the absence of Food Security policy/strategy and institutional framework. 
In addition, UNICEF identifies three main categories of underlying causes of malnutrition: i) household 
food insecurity (caused by insufficient production or supply of food, inadequate income and/or 
purchasing power, lack of physical access to markets, and unstable supply of food and income); ii) 
poor social and care environment (which consists of poor infant feeding practices, poor home care for 
ill children, and poor health care seeking behavior); and iii) Poor access to health care and unhealthy 
environment. 
Overnutrition, which is defined as the overconsumption of nutrients and food to the point at which health 
is adversely affected, can develop into obesity. Obesity in turn increases the risk of serious health 
conditions, including cardiovascular disease, hypertension, cancer, and type-2 diabetes. Therefore,  it 
must be understood that overnutrition is more to do with lifestyle changes rather than inadequate supply 
and access to nutrition foods. 
The main underlying causes of food insecurity and malnutrition are summarized below: 
1.4.2.1. Poverty 
Widespread poverty which was exasperated during the civil war of 1991 accompanied by drought, flood 
and poor market access had disrupted livelihood options and activities. These terrible combinations 
have made majority of households destitute; unable to produce or access the food they needed. 
According to the World Bank, as of 2016, more than 50% of Somalis were poor with one third of the 
population living in conditions of extreme poverty25; a clear indicator of the inability of people to be food 
secure. 
23 Somalia Nutrition Cluster report (Jan. –June 2020) 
24 SHDS, 2020 
25 World Bank (2016), Somali Poverty Profile. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
11
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
1.4.2.2. Conflict and insecurity 
The civil war had a profound impact on people’s livelihood systems, where it prevented an optimal use 
of resources for creation of livelihoods and increased women’s vulnerability to exclusion, health, 
education and social mobility. Specifically, destruction and looting of agricultural equipment and rural 
agricultural/irrigation infrastructure led to the displacement of most of the riverine farmers and agro- 
pastoralist who were engaged in both crop production and livestock rearing into the big towns of the 
country whereas other hundreds thousands crossed to the borders of neighboring countries. Insecurity 
arising during armed conflict also disrupted flow of goods and commodities and restricted movement, 
resulting in food and nutrition insecurity in most areas affected by the armed conflict. 
Conflicts remain the main causes of insecurity; and when people fear being insecure, they abandon 
their livelihood activities (whether cultivation or livestock keeping, fishing, or trade) and seek relatively 
secure areas temporarily as internally displaced persons (IDPs). For example, agricultural production 
has been disrupted by actual conflict and war that induced mass displacement and migrations and 
loss of lives. Affected people were not able to harvest their crops and in some areas the crops and 
villages were burnt. This adversely affected food production and security in the country. Most of the 
people affected by the conflict and civil war were farmers and pastoralist and their displacement during 
harvest season undermined national food security. They lost their farm tools, livestock, and other 
household assets and become displaced from their homes. While a specific data on displaced people 
due to conflict is not readily available, it is estimated than not less than half of the 2.6 million IDPs are 
believed to be displaced due to conflict and insecurity. 
It is beyond the scope of this section to narrate the different types of conflicts and their root causes  in 
Somalia. What is critically important is that unless conflict and insecurity are comprehensively 
addressed, millions of people will continue to remain food insecure throughout the country; and this 
situation calls for the development of comprehensive framework or strategy for conflict management 
and peace building. 
1.4.2.3. Drought 
Severe drought is a recurrent phenomenon in Somalia because of its geographical location, uncertain 
rainfall and its fragile environment. Severe droughts have had disastrous impacts on Somali communities 
in 1964, 1969, 1974, 1987, 1988, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2008 and 2011. The worst droughts which 
occurred in Somalia during 2011 caused the death of around 250,000 people and the displacement of 
hundreds of thousands of families from their villages who were previously involved in agriculture and 
livestock production. What exacerbated the environmental degradation is the unabated cutting of trees 
and burning charcoal for export to Gulf of Arabia. In addition, for nearly 30 years there were no 
government services in protecting the environment. This is what partly attributed to the drastic decline 
of rainfall, while large swaths of land mass tend to be desert if not acted quickly. About one sixth (2.6 
million) Somalis were internally displaced due to conflict, drought and floods and an additional one 
million are refugees fled from Somalia to the brink of famine. The drought in 2017 caused an estimated 
USD 3.25 billion in damage and losses, resulting in a recovery process that is likely to last many years. 
With historical trends of drought frequency indicated that droughts occur regularly at intervals of 2–3 
years in the Deyr season and 8–10 years in consecutive Deyr and Gu seasons alongside annual 
flooding during the rainy season26. 
1.4.2.4. Floods 
Flooding has always been a major problem that affect the livelihoods of thousands riverine community 
along the Shabele and Juba rivers. River floods occur along the Juba and Shebelle rivers in Southern 
Somalia, whereas flash floods are common along the intermittent streams in Somaliland and Puntland 
states. The recurrent river and flash floods yearly cause displacement of thousands of households 
from their homes, destruction of thousands of hectares of crop lands and blockages of transportation 
system. 
26 2018. Drought Impact Needs Assessment (2018); Federal Government of Somalia, 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
12
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
Main cause of river flood is heavy downpour along Shabelle and Juba river catchments in the Ethiopian 
highlands. The situation is exacerbated when inside Somalia also receives heavy rains in long hours. This 
contributes to the rise of river level and creates also flush floods. Somalia is prone to river floods because 
of river bank fractures with limited repair for about 3 decades, caused by mainly the prolonged civil war. 
The past severe floods were those of the Deyr in 1961, 1977, 1997 and 2006 and the floods of the GU 
season in 1981 and 2005 and 2019.27 These floods resulted in human casualties and major economic 
damage in the form of livestock and crop losses. Based on the past experience, the most serious effects 
of floods include internal displacement of the residents in the affected areas, outbreak of diseases such 
as watery diarrhea, malaria, respiratory diseases, and destruction of crops in the farmlands, canals and 
houses. Somalia also occasionally suffers from the effects of tropical cyclones (e.g. in November 2013 
and November 2015) causing the loss of livestock, destruction of property and infrastructure, while locust 
outbreaks at times cause severe damage to agro-pastoral crops. 
Flash and riverine flooding in Somalia has affected about 918,000 people, of whom 412,000 have    been 
displaced and 24 killed, in 29 districts, as of 16 May. The risk of disease outbreaks is high due to crowding 
in areas where displaced people are seeking temporary shelter28. 
Continued flash and riverine floods have since late June affected an estimated 191,800 people in 
Hirshabelle, South West and Jubaland states as well as Banadir region. Among those affected, about 
124,200 people have been displaced from their homes. Another 5,000 peope are at risk of further 
displacement in Jowhar, Middle Shabelle. Since May, an estimated 149,000 hectares of farmland have 
been damaged by floods in 100 villages in Jowhar, Mahaday and Balcad districts, Middle Shabelle 
region29. 
The latest floods point to a worrying pattern where extreme weather conditions are increasing in frequency 
and intensity. Prior to June 2020, flash floods and riverine flooding caused by seasonal rains displaced 
more than 450,000 in the country. With floods in 2018 and 2019 displacing 281,000 and 416,000 persons 
respectively, the flood-based displacement figures demonstrate a rising year-to-year trend. Somalia’s re-
occurring climate related emergencies result in devastating impact on communities who heavily rely on 
farming and livestock for their livelihood30. 
1.4.2.5. Displacement 
Displacement which has been caused by the civil war/insecurity, drought, and floods still remain an 
important factor of food insecurity.  For example, according to the UN revised 2020 HRP, currently out of 
1.7 million IDPs who are displaced by conflict, insecurity, droughts, and floods; 1.4 million in 74 districts 
are targeted for humanitarian assistance in Somalia. Majority of the displaced due to insecurity and floods 
are from productive areas, who, before their displacement, were producing large quantities of crops. Their 
displacement means that on one side, they no longer contribute to the national food availability, while on 
the other side; they increased cereal demand for their survival. 
By the end of 2019, approximately 2.6 million Somalis currently are displaced within their own country. 
The largest concentration, around half a million, is in the Somali capital, Mogadishu. Some were displaced 
nearly 30 years ago, whereas others continue to arrive in the city on a daily basis due to conflict and 
climate factors31. Data collected by UNHCR indicates that approximately 126,000 people were displaced 
between Jan and March 2020 mainly because of insecurity (76%), mostly from Lower Shabelle, Bay, 
Galgaduud and Gedo regions. Other major reasons for population displacement include lack of livelihood 
opportunities (17%) and drought (4%). 
27 The Somalia National Development Plan (SNDP) – Towards Recovery, Democracy and Prosperity 2017 – 2019 
28 Somalia Flood Response Plan; UN, June 2020; https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/SOMALIA_FLOOD_ 
RESPONSE_PLAN_May2020.pdf 
29 Somalia Flood Response Plan; UN, June 2020 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/SOMALIA_FLOOD_RESPONSE_ 
PLAN_May2020.pf 
30 Ibid 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
13
=== PAGE 20 ===
31 https://www.refugeesinternational.org/reports/2019/12/13/durable-solutions-somalia-moving-from-policies-practice-for-idps-mogadishu
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
1.4.2.6. Poor performance of productive sectors 
As described in the preceding sections, the performance of productive sectors (agriculture, livestock, 
and fisheries) has been very low, unable to meet the domestic food requirements despite the potential. 
The performance is attributed to the lack of good agricultural practices, inadequate access to and 
usage of production inputs and technology, among others. 
1.4.2.7. Inadequate market access 
Poor quality roads (destroyed during the civil war), insufficient road networks, and disruption of market 
activities due to insecurity have significantly reduced access to markets; resulting in high food prices 
which in turn affect purchasing power of the poor households, especially nomadic pastoralists. 
1.4.2.8. Inadequate coverage and access to clean water and sanitation facilities 
According to Somalia Health and Demographic Survey report (2020), 65 percent of households     get 
their drinking water from improved water sources. Slightly over three-quarters (76 percent) of urban 
households have access to improved water sources, while just over half (55 percent) of rural 
households and 35 percent of nomadic households have access to improved water. According to  the 
same Survey, 57% of households have an improved sanitation facility although variations across 
regions and residential areas exist. Inadequate access to water and sanitation results in improper 
utilization of food. 
1.4.2.9. Cultural factor 
Socio-cultural factors such as cultural feeding habits, young children feeding practices, low education 
levels among women, early marriage, morbidity and antenatal care, are some of the underlying causes 
of malnutrition. 
. 
1.4.2.10. Khat consumption and its socio-economic effects 
Khat-chewing is an insidious habit that affects food security and livelihood of many families in Somalia. 
With its adverse social, economic and medical consequences it has become a problem of grave 
national concern. NDP 9 admits that Khat consumption contributes to poverty as it affects people’s 
ability to support family and divert income from household; Khat traders also move hard currency to 
Ethiopia and Kenya without meaningful exchange for Somalia to reduce trade deficit. In Somalia, Khat 
has created considerable problems of social, health and economic nature. In addition, Khat has 
adverse socio-economic consequences including the loss of thousands of acres of arable land and 
billions of hours of work. 
1.4.2.11. Absence of national food security policy/strategy and Institutional Framework 
Despite the fact that Somalia has been a food insecure country for a very long time (even before the 
civil war), it doesn’t still have a national food security policy or strategy and institutional framework 
under which food security policies or strategies could be managed. The absence of national policies 
and/or strategies in turn has been due to the civil war and absence of a strong national government 
until 2012; when the Transitional Federal government has been put in place. Since then, sector 
policies and strategies have gradually begun to be formulated and implemented with support from 
international  and regional partners. The Somalia National Development Plan (NDP 2017-2019) 
expressed the absence of a national food security institutional framework in the following manner 
“There are no Somali institutions to develop and oversee policy that affects the multiple determinants 
of food insecurity. There is no Somali institution to neither provide the monitoring, analysis nor compile 
the data required to monitor food security conditions. There is no national institution to work with 
different levels of government to take actions necessary to put an end to food insecurity or to guide the 
development of early action to prevent a food insecurity related crisis”32. 
32 Somalia National Development Plan 2017-2019, Federal Government of Somalia, P 161. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
14
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The absence of national food security policy and/or Strategy has created large vacuum in coordination 
among line ministries with critical roles to address food and nutrition insecurity. Furthermore, food 
security policies and strategies provide the basis for increased food production, distribution, market 
access, nutrition improvement, social protection and humanitarian assistance for the most vulnerable. 
In recognition of the absence of institutional framework for the management of Food Security and 
Nutrition, the NDP – 9 has indicated the need to establish a national (inter-ministerial) commission 
responsible for the coordination of the food security agenda across government. Key actions for    the 
formation of this “Commission” include i) selection and appointment of a committee for national 
commission for food security; and ii) preparation of a government food security strategy, taking special 
account of the needs of the vulnerable, particularly women and young children 
The combination of underlying causes of food insecurity within the context of increasing population 
and dwindling and degraded natural resources base has a powerful negative impact on the Food 
Security and Nutrition of the population. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
15
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
Section 2: National Food Security Policy Framework 
2.1. Food Security Conceptual Framework 
The widely accepted definition of food security is that of the World Food Summit, 1996 which states 
that “Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to 
sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active 
and healthy life.” Accordingly, the National Policy Objectives, Policy Statements, and Policy Measures 
are formulated based on the basis of this food security conceptual framework. 
2.2. Rationale 
The analysis in the preceding sections of the agriculture, livestock, fisheries, trade sectors; and other 
factors such as insecurity/conflict and climatic shocks highlights the declining trends of domestic crop 
production and access to markets, which have led to a massive increase in food imports. There    has 
also been high dependency on markets (mainly by pastoralists) and imported foods; making Somalia 
very vulnerable to market disruptions caused by conflict, droughts, and global market price shocks. 
The high level of dependence on imported foods coupled with inadequate domestic food production 
raises significant food insecurity challenges, requiring the development of a national food security 
Policy and a serious review of sector policies and strategies to overcome these challenges by exploring 
potential opportunities. 
Despite the fact that Somalia has been experiencing food insecurity for a very long time, it lacked a 
national food security policy and national inter-sectoral institutional framework to effectively liberate its 
people from various forms of food and nutrition insecurity: chronic, acute, and cyclical. In this case, the 
establishment of a broad-based multi-sectoral “Food Security Commission” envisaged under NDP 
-9 is an important provision to move forward to legally establish the institutional framework and its 
structures.  
A country which produces less than 50% of its food requirements despite its potential, and hence 
dependent on unsustainable food imports and food aid; the need to develop a national food security 
policy is of paramount importance. In recognition of these challenges, the MOAI and partners organized 
a national Conference on Food Security and Agricultural Development in January 2018. 
The overall objective of the national food security conference was to conduct a comprehensive multi- 
stakeholder consultative conference which had two main aims: first, given the economic, social and 
(food) security importance of the agricultural sector, the MOAI intended to put Food Security and 
Nutrition (through sustainable agricultural development) at the centre of the national development 
agenda. Second, given the institutional fragmentation and the inadequate level of coordination and 
collaboration across Federal Government of Somalia and Federal States Authorities, the conference 
aimed to bring together all major stakeholders of the Food Security and Nutrition agenda in Somalia to 
discuss and deliberate on the current status and future policies for the food security. These included 
both the national key institutions such as the MoAI, Ministry of Livestock, Ministry of Fishery and 
Marine Resources and Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Coordination (MoPIC), Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Humanitarian Response and Disaster Management, Office of 
the Prime Minister as well as the Line Ministries from the Federal States. 
Somalia is gradually transiting from insecurity and emergencies towards peace and stability, paving 
the way for the development of long-term policies and strategies of the productive and socio-economic 
sectors contributing to achieving food security. This presents an opportunity to identify and prioritize 
investment potentials available from the private sector, Federal Government of Somalia, Foreign Direct 
Investment, Overseas Development Assistance including regional institutions such as IGAD, 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
16
=== PAGE 24 ===
COMESA, and AU/NEPAD/CAADP.
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
Therefore, the main purpose of the Policy is to declare government intention and commitments as well 
as to guide its institutions (at all levels), development partners, and other key stakeholders in their 
efforts to address food and nutrition insecurity through a number of measures, strategies, and action 
plans. This Policy has identified a number of specific policy objectives, policy statements (government 
declaration of intent), and policy measures on the basis of the food security conceptual framework to 
ensure the Overall Policy Goal is realized. 
2.3. Policy Goal and Objective 
The Goal of the National Food Security Policy is to achieve Food Security at national and household 
levels. The overall objective is to ensure that adequate quantity of safe and nutritionally acceptable 
food is available at affordable prices and at any place and at all times, to all the people of Somalia, 
particularly, to the most vulnerable, women and children as specified under the NDP- 9. In order to meet 
the overall objective, this national policy document has defined key specific objectives, statements and 
measures built around the four pillars of food security and cross-cutting issues to realize the goal of 
this policy. 
2.4. Guiding principles 
Political leadership and commitment: Strong political leadership and commitment is necessary to 
transform the political will into concrete plans, enforceable laws and programs to have an impact on 
sustainable food security. 
Human rights: that adequate food and nutrition is a human right; the protection of human rights and 
freedoms as enshrined in the transitional Constitution of Somalia, the right to adequate food is fully 
accepted as a human right. The right for everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food shall be 
observed in accordance with the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger. 
Multi-sectoral approach, partnerships and effective coordination: Food security has multi-sectoral 
ramifications. It is, therefore, imperative that this policy document should be jointly owned, implemented 
and monitored by all the sectoral ministries, civil society organizations and stakeholders involved     in 
food security issues. The national and local development plans should be also harmonized and 
streamlined as much as possible while all other relevant actors of the food security agenda should 
align their interventions and programs to the Food Security Policy. 
Food aid management: programmes shall be designed for the most vulnerable  people  whose needs 
cannot be addressed through any viable programmes other than being supported by special 
programmes like food aid. Efforts shall be made to ensure that food aid is not used for political purposes 
or as a means of forcing other concessions and bribes. Large scale distributions shall remain a last 
resort. 
Social Protection Programs should aim at targeting the most vulnerable such as IDPs, nomadic 
pastoralists, poor agro-pastoralists, the urban poor, the elderly and other destitute households/ 
individuals. 
Enhanced use of reliable data and information: as much as possible and resources allow, food security 
and nutrition projects, programs, and decisions should be based on evidence generated from reliable 
data and information. 
Alignment, synergies, and compliance to national and international plans, commitments and obligations: 
For maximum benefits in coordination and implementation of national Policies, Strategies, Programs 
and Plans, as well as ensure the legitimacy within regional and international partners, the Policy is 
aligned with: 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
17
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
i) National Plans and sectoral policies and strategies: (NDP-9, SDGs; National Disaster Risk 
Reduction Policy, Recovery and resilience Framework (RRF), Livestock Sector Development Strategy, 
Agriculture Sector Development Strategy, National Investment Law, National Fertilizer Policy, and 
National Irrigation Policy; 
ii) Africa Regional Programs, obligations, and commitments: IGAD pillar 1 (Agriculture, Natural 
Resources and Environment; Agriculture, Livestock and Food Security Programme Area); The four 
Strategic Objectives of COMESA; the four Pillars of CAADP/NEPAD; AU/Malabo Declaration; AU 
Maputo Declaration; 
iii) International Frameworks/instruments: The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
World Food Summit/Global Strategic for Food Security and Nutrition-Guddiga Sugnaanta Cunta (CFS)/ 
Sugnaanta Cuntada Adduunka (GSF) (non-binding practical guidelines on core recommendations for 
food security and nutrition strategies, policies, and actions at country level). 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
18
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
Section 3: Main Policy Issues, Objectives, Statements, and Measures 
The impact of widespread poverty, recurrent climatic shocks (flood and draught), and insecurity outweigh 
government capacity in all its forms to address food insecurity and socio-economic development.    In 
2020, for example, 5.2 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance, out of which 3.0 million 
people are targeted to receive some kind of humanitarian support. This is estimated to cost the 
humanitarian community about $ 1.05 billion33. 
The capacity of Federal Government of Somalia, which has meager resources to respond to such 
needs of massive scale on annual basis, is extremely limited. Hence, in the short term, humanitarian 
needs (including food insecurity) will have to be covered by the humanitarian community, while the 
federal government plays key roles in facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance. Furthermore, 
the federal government shall lay the foundation and the conditions necessary for achieving sustainable 
food security through a number of actions. Key among these conditions include the formulation       of 
sector & sub-sector policies and strategies; updating information on food insecure households/ 
populations and livelihood groups and their location (disaggregated by chorionic and acute food 
insecurity); identification of priority areas for road infrastructure rehabilitation and construction; 
strengthening agricultural and socio-economic research, formulation and enforcement of regulations, 
standards, and quality control; facilitation of domestic and foreign trade, encouraging the private sector 
to implement recommended attractive businesses along the value chain of commercial crops, meat, 
and dairy industry, etc. 
In the long term, the federal government shall increase its revenue from the emerging private sector 
including the vibrant financial sector, aviation sector, ITC, petroleum, and other extractive industries; 
foreign trade (export of livestock and commercial crops). In addition, the government shall increase 
Overseas Development Assistance for long-term investment in rural infrastructure (including irrigation), 
to invest in natural resource management, climate-smart agriculture, to boost economic growth, reduce 
poverty, and ensure food security. 
The following Policy Objectives, Statements and Measures with regard to the four food security 
dimensions and other important areas described in subsequent sections are designed taking into 
account the short and medium to long-term institutional, human resource and economic capacity of 
both the Federal and member state governments. 
3.1. Food Availability 
At the national level, food availability is a combination of domestic food production, domestic food 
stocks, commercial food imports and food aid. At the household level, it is the availability of food from 
own production, from the market, or through gift (from kin) or a combination of all. In Somalia, for over 
a decade, the total domestic food production has never been able to cover national requirements even 
in good year. As a direct result of inadequate domestic food production, national requirements have 
been covered through limited commercial imports and food assistance by the humanitarian 
community. This trend puts the country at risk of being dependent on volatile world food supply and 
markets and must be reversed. 
3.1.1. Policy Context 
According to FAO (2020)34; the 2020/21 domestic cereal availability is expected to be 205,000 mt. 
(169, 000 mt mainly domestic production of sorghum and maize plus 36,000 mt stock drawdown). Out 
of this 205,000 mt, domestic production is estimated to be 169,000 mt while cereal requirement 
(sorghum, maize, wheat, and rice) would be 1,090,000 mt. This leaves a huge deficit of 885,000 mt 
33 UN OCHA, Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan, January 2020. 
34 FAO; 2020; Cereal supply and demand balances for sub-Saharan African countries – Situation as of June 2020. Rome. https:// 
doi.org/10.4060/ca9804en 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
19
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
which should be cover by imports. The 2020 production and consumption requirements, compared with 
the last five years’ average, indicates that production has fallen by 13% while imports will increase around 
4%. Given the expected decline in remittances and increased importation demand, without taking in to 
account global food supply situation, domestic food prices are likely to increase, affecting both availability 
and access to food, especially to vulnerable population who depend on markets. 
This is somehow consistent with the NDP-9 (2020-2024), which indicates that the agriculture sector meets 
only 22 percent of domestic cereals needs. Even in the best agricultural seasons, domestic production 
provides only about 40–50 percent of per capita cereal needs35. 
Despite many challenges and constraints to raising production and productivity, the outcome of the 2018 
Food Security Conference as well as sector strategies of agriculture, livestock and fisheries and the 
investment law have identified opportunities to maximize the potential of these sectors to boost production 
with the aim of ensuring food security both at the national and household levels. Opportunities in irrigation 
infrastructure investment for efficient and sustainable water and land management will significantly 
increase agricultural production of both staples and export-oriented cash crops. This is in line with the 
National Irrigation Policy (2019) to generate good returns. The Federal Government Investment Law is also 
expected to attract investors for domestic consumption as well as for export. Key to unlocking the potential 
of irrigation agriculture is the rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation and drainage infrastructure. 
The livestock sector provides nutrient-rich meat and dairy products to the population. Improved livestock 
feed and fodder production coupled with animal health care services are proven to increase milk and meat 
production, making prices more affordable. With investment in rural infrastructure for efficient market 
linkages (including targeting nomadic and agro-pastoralists in remote areas); meat and dairy products 
could reach urban and semi-urban population. 
The fisheries sector is another important sector which contributes to household income, and supplying the 
market with nutritious fish. But its potential has been under-utilized due to constraints related to production, 
processing and marketing. Fish is low in saturated fats and is an excellent source of omega‐3 fats that are 
especially good for the health. The nutritional value of seafood contributes to alleviating malnutrition and 
hunger in a region where food insecurity is a chronic problem due to inconsistency of rainfall, draught and 
famine, which Somalia experienced in 2011 and 2017. 
3.1.2. Policy Objective: Adequate, diversified and safe food is available all year round to the entire 
population. 
3.1.3. Policy Statement: The Government will ensure that adequate quantity and diversified foods are 
available through domestic production, commercial imports, food stocks, and food aid both at 
national and household level throughout the year. 
3.1.4. Policy Measures: In order to meet the objective of food availability, the government will take the 
following policy measures. 
3.1.4.1. Increase crop production and productivity: Domestic crop production must be significantly 
increased to meet the ever growing food demand of the population. To this end, the Government 
will take the following measures: 
Improve access to agricultural inputs and credit facilities 
i. support the private sector agro-based service providers (agro-dealers) to provide agricultural inputs 
(seeds, fertilizers, insecticides, farm tools, equipment and implements) in timely manner by easing 
licencing, taxation, and other operational modalities without undermining safety and quality control; 
ii. encourage and support private financial services providers (commercial banks, microfinance 
institutions, other lending platforms/companies, etc) to extend financial services to farmers and agro- 
dealers at affordable prices and favourable terms; 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
20
=== PAGE 29 ===
35 NDP-9 (2020-2024)
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
Land tenure security and land management: 
iii. address land tenure security through land certification both for large-scale commercial investors to 
ensure long term investments and for smallholders for the use of their land as collateral; 
iv. encourage both smallholders and large-scale commercial farmers in land management practices 
with the aim of improving soil fertility, while preventing soil erosion; 
v. Establish land use directorate/department under MOAI with clear terms of reference to serve as a 
foal department for land issues 
Improve irrigation and water harvesting infrastructure 
vi. invest in maintenance, modernization and efficient management of irrigation infrastructure for 
sustainable production of high-value crops in line with the National Irrigation Policy; 
vii. develop technical and managerial capacity of institutions (private, government) and the staff involved 
in irrigation design and management 
viii. raise awareness and mobilise rural households to catch surface water (runoff) during rainy seasons 
to produce short-duration or early maturing vegetables and crops 
ix. periodic review of irrigation infrastructure status, soil salinity, and other factors affecting irrigation 
quality 
Improve crop production and diversification 
x. promote the application of good agricultural practices (appropriate and adequate application of 
fertilisers, improved seeds, and agronomic/crop husbandry practices); 
xi. Strengthen agricultural research to develop drought resistant, early maturing crops for drought-prone 
rainfed areas while developing high yielding varieties for irrigated areas; establish seed multiplication 
centers for increasing availability of certified and improved seeds; appropriate pesticides with safety 
instructions, fertiliser requirements for different soil types, farm machinery and implements, etc; 
xii.  Facilitate the development of comprehensive agricultural extension packages which can offer 
choices from which farmers could select and apply on their farms for increasing their production and 
productivity. Agricultural extension will have to be strongly connected to agricultural research for two- 
way communication 
xiii. support and facilitate individuals, households/families/cooperatives, commercial farmers, schools, 
health centres, and other private and public institutions for year-round production of vegetables in all 
suitable location; strengthen distribution systems and market linkages for timely delivery of fresh 
produce to the nearby markets/consumers; 
xiv. encourage the production of cash crops for export and provide regulations and standards for export 
quality without undermining the balance between production for domestic consumption and export; 
xv. encourage and facilitate urban crop production through kitchen gardening for low income households 
by way of providing seeds and small implements 
Promote crop protection practices 
xvi. Establish and support a competent national authority responsible for official controls of plant health, 
agrochemicals, seed and varieties. 
xvii. Strengthen Plant Protection and Early Warning departments of MOAI to monitor and alert the 
concerned authorities and the public of the likely occurrence of migratory pests such as locust, 
quella-quella birds and army worm. 
3.1.4.2. Increase Livestock production and productivity and livestock products: livestock production need 
to be increased to diversify food sources and ensure availability/supply of livestock products (meat, 
dairy products) to meet nutritional requirements of the population. In line with the Livestock Sector 
Development Policy and development strategy, the government will. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
21
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
Improve access to credit, technology and skills 
i. 
Extend targeted support through the most appropriate government and private sector to increase 
financial capacity, knowledge, and skilled man power to develop an efficient dairy sector; 
ii. 
Explore and design appropriate avenues to ensure access to credit for livestock owners; 
iii. 
Support the emerging private sector (companies, community groups and individuals’) efforts 
along the value chain including domestic and foreign livestock trade, meat and milk production & 
processing, and production and distribution of fodder; 
iv. 
Support private sector animal health care service providers for the delivery of veterinary drugs 
and associated inputs/equipment for the prevention and control of animal diseases and pests by 
way of strengthening their technical, financial and operational capacities as well as compliance 
with safety standards and regulations; 
v. 
Increase poultry and apiculture (beekeeping) farming through technical and material support, 
especially to low income households and women groups 
Increase livestock marketing and trade 
vi. 
Invest in rural infrastructure to facilitate livestock trade, delivery of milk to urban areas; efficient 
transportation of fodder, etc to ensure nomadic pastoralists and remote agro-pastoralists equally 
benefit from such facilities; 
vii. 
Facilitate regional and international livestock trade/export through enforcing sanitary, safety, and 
other regulatory measures and standards; 
Improve livestock production and productivity 
viii. Invest in livestock research for herd improvement, fodder quality, dairy product improvement 
technology, etc. 
ix. 
Maximise the use of various water harvesting methods to ensure water and pasture availability 
in critical times for livestock 
x. 
Improve climate resilient pasture and range land management and promote sustainable range 
and livestock management system. 
3.1.4.3. Increase Fisheries production in order to make nutritious food derived from fish available to the 
population, the government will: 
Improve fish production 
i. 
Promote increased local fish consumption through well-designed public awareness mechanisms 
including corporate communication channels (to create effective demand). This will encourage 
fish producers to catch sufficient quantity for domestic consumption. It has to be promoted a 
source of food security because it is available in large quantities in Somalia’s vast waters.36 
ii. 
Initiate fisheries database and management system to guide data collection activities with the 
aim of increasing availability and reliability of data and information. This will address the reliability 
of data on the quantity of available fish and its potential monetary value, especially on the catches 
in the 200 mile EEZ or in the coastal zone for domestic as well as foreign trade. 
iii. 
Invest in infrastructure for coastal fisheries to improve cold-chain facilities; fish landing facilities 
at all major ports, transport links between major urban centers and isolated fishing communities 
along the coast.37 
iv. 
Promote and support river fishing techniques 
36 Improving Development and Management of Somalia’s Marine Fisheries and Controlling Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated 
(IUU) Fishing POLICY PAPER Prepared by: Trans‐Africa Consultancy Services for African Development Solutions February 2015 
37 World Bank (2018) Country partnership framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia for the Period FY19-22. August 29, 2018. 
Country Management Unit, AFCE1 Africa Region 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
22
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
Improve fish marketing 
v. 
Promote the development of fish value chains to increase both domestic consumption and export 
vi. 
Support and promote improved fish supply chain through improving standards and facilities for 
fish handling from harvest to consumption. These include roads, fish landing jetties, cold storage, 
ice plants, fish processing areas, fish market outlets, fish quality control laboratories and other 
facilities with the aim of enabling full utilization of fisheries resources and for fishing communities 
to get fair price for their fish. 
vii. 
Increase funding to the fisheries sector in order to realize the above benefits 
3.1.4.4. Commercial food imports: until domestic food production reaches a level where commercial 
staple food imports are no longer required; the government shall facilitate the private sector   for 
importation of cereals, edible oil, and necessary food commodities. At the same time, the 
Government will 
i. 
Inspect and verify the quality and safety of imported foods through the appropriate government 
agency to ensure safety and quality according to national and international standards and 
regulations; 
ii. 
Make necessary customs and duty exemptions to make the price of imported foods affordable to 
the local population without distorting domestic prices of similar goods; 
iii. 
Inspect and verify physosanitray requirements, certificate of origin, and other required certificates 
and information from the country of origin; 
iv. 
Inspect and verify the physical condition of warehouses and/or silos with respect to moisture, 
temperature & humidity control mechanisms, as well as other standard food storage requirements 
to ensure that foods are not infested by insects and fungi while quality does not deteriorate under 
bad storage conditions. 
3.1.4.5 Food Aid: Food shall be provided to the most food insecure, vulnerable households and, IDPs 
as determined jointly by the government and humanitarian agencies. In order to expedite import 
and distribution of food aid, the government shall: 
i. 
Facilitate all the required government formalities such as customs clearance, declaration, and 
related processes for efficient clearing and handling; 
ii. 
Ensure that the foods imported are of quality and safe for human consumption and accompanied 
with phytosanitray certificate, certificate of origin, and other information from the country of origin 
as well as from the donating agency. 
iii. 
Provide security during internal transportation and delivery of food aid. 
iv. 
Ensure that food aid is strictly distributed to the target beneficiaries without other negative socio-
cultural and socio-economic outcomes (more details are provided under Humanitarian Aid 
Management Policy section). 
3.2. Access to Food 
Access is ensured when households and individuals in the household have enough resources to obtain 
food in sufficient quantity, quality and diversity for a nutritious diet. Household access to food is 
determined by the following four factors: i) quantity and diversity of own production, ii) physical access38; 
iii) economic access39, iv) socio-cultural support mechanisms (kinship support and remittances) in the 
form of gifts including food grains, livestock and cash remittances. Household access to food may be 
affected for short or extended periods by the following factors: i) insecurity, ii) drought and floods, iii) 
loss or reduced income and employment due to insecurity, drought and foods, and iv) global and/or 
national food supply shortages; lack of or reduced incomes/unemployment. 
38 Physical access includes (road networks and market linkages; transportation to deliver food and other commodities to and from 
markets); 
39 Economic access at household or individual level includes (income and purchasing power: the ability of individuals to generate 
income from seasonal or permanent employment or casual labor wages; sale of surplus products (such as of crops, livestock, and 
other assets) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
23
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
3.2.1. Policy context: 
Shortage of food production and supplies as a result of insecurity, displacement, coupled with 
inadequate income and purchasing power will severely affect millions of IDPs; people living in flood 
and drought prone areas with limited access to markets (including nomadic pastoralists); and the urban 
and peri-urban poor who depend on casual wages and services in the informal sector. 
For a country which produces less than 50% of its food requirements; affected by ongoing sporadic 
armed conflict and climatic shocks as well as hosting over 2 million internally displaced people; 
ensuring access to food remains a huge and formidable challenge. The government recognizes its 
responsibility in ensuring access to food at all times to its citizens. However, it is still in the recovery 
phase, trying to consolidate peace and security; operating with minimal financial resources to support 
the rural productive sectors. Under such scenarios, ensuring access to food, particularly to the millions 
of displaced, the urban and peri-urban poor, the poor in agro-pastoral and nomadic pastoralists shall 
jointly be addressed by the government with substantial support from the humanitarian community 
until such times come for the government to take full responsibility for its citizens. 
3.2.2. Policy Objective: To enable households and individuals in the household obtain food in sufficient 
quantity, quality and diversity for a nutritious diet through adequate resources and entitlements. 
3.2.3. Policy Statement: Subject to availability of the required resources and capacity (economic, 
institutional, human resource, and social protection), the government will strive to ensure physical and 
economic access to nutritionally acceptable food to its citizens, particularly the poor and vulnerable. 
3.2.4. Policy measures: Within the limits of government resources and in collaboration with 
development partners and the private sector, the government will take a number of measures to attain 
the policy objective of access to food. 
3.2.4.1. Increase income and purchasing power: In order to obtain/purchase food, households need 
to get jobs and (self) employment from all available opportunities from daily wages to contractual 
work, from small own informal business to large formal industries in rural or urban areas. The 
government will: 
i. 
Promote skills training for entrepreneurship development with aim of creating jobs and self- 
employment, especially for IDPs, women and urban and peri-urban poor; 
ii. 
Promote value addition along with value chain in crop, livestock, and fisheries sectors, to create 
more jobs and increase incomes and purchasing power for people engaged in small and medium 
enterprises; 
iii. 
Support the private sector to extend credit facilities to those who are able to run small-scale 
agro-based enterprises, handicrafts and other income generating activities; 
iv. 
Support the development of a more business-friendly environment by updating administrative 
and bureaucratic procedures and providing tailored advisory services to encourage micro and 
small enterprise to become part of the formal economy. 
3.2.4.2. Improve market access/market linkages 
i. 
Facilitate domestic food trade through fair tax regimes and removal of other trade related 
barriers; 
i. 
Invest and expand rural infrastructure (especially roads) throughout the country a) to strengthen 
effective market linkages for uninterrupted supply and flow of food and non-food commodities 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
24
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
for those who entirely depend on food purchases and markets; and b) to reduce market prices 
or cost of food and non-food commodities 
i. 
Encourage and support the private sector to strengthen dairy market linkages between rural 
producers and urban consumers to making prices affordable to urban consumers. 
i. Establish a market information system and provide timely market information to producers,  traders, 
and consumers about market prices and trends on regular basis at local, regional, national and 
international levels. This will require designing and implementing effective system for data 
collection and analysis as well as training of personnel to manage the system under the most 
appropriate federal government institution which will have its lower level structures. 
3.2.4.3. Strengthen social protection measures 
i. 
Promote Public Works Programs such as cash for work to generate off-farm employment and 
income for the poor by supporting labor intensive activities such as road rehabilitation and 
maintenance, soil conservation, forestry and water supply and sanitation schemes. 
ii. 
Create conducive atmosphere for people to return to their original homes with re-establishment 
packages including food for a given period of time, provision of agricultural inputs and small 
ruminants, water,  sanitation, and health, education infrastructure and facilities step-by-step    in 
line with NDP-9 durable solutions to long-term displacement in line with Durable Solutions 
strategies 
iii. 
In collaboration with development partners, scale-up  social  protection  programs  targeting the 
most food insecure and vulnerable in the form of food/cash for work, or voucher system, 
emergency food distribution, and other safety net programs depending on the local context and 
in line with the 2019 National Social Protection Policy of the Federal Government of Somalia. 
3.3. Food utilization and nutrition improvement 
The World Food Summit’s definition of utilization (the third element of food security) is “safe and 
nutritious food which meets individuals’ dietary needs”. The availability of and access to food on their 
own are not enough, people have to be assured of “safe and nutritious food”. The food consumed has 
to provide sufficient energy to enable the consumer to carry out routine physical activities. Utilization 
covers factors such as intra-household food distribution, health care practices, safe drinking water, 
adequate sanitary facilities, food safety, preparation, and storage conditions. 
3.3.1. Policy context: 
Water and sanitation: According to Somalia Health and Demographic Survey report (2020), 65 
percent of households get their drinking water from improved water sources. Slightly over three- 
quarters (76 percent) of urban households have access to improved water sources, while just over 
half (55 percent) of rural households and 35 percent of nomadic households have access to improved 
water. According to the same Survey, 57% of households have an improved sanitation facility although 
variations across regions and residential areas exist. Currently, only 16% of households treat water 
before drinking (22%urban, 9% rural and 0% nomadic households). By treating water effectively at 
home, families can improve the quality of household drinking water. The above statistical data and 
information indicates that a lot has to be done to improve access to clean water and sanitation facilities. 
The current situation is a cause for concern and aggravates diseases caused by unsafe water and 
poor hygiene and sanitation. 
Health care: the health care coverage is Somalia is perhaps one of the lowest in the world due the 
lack of investment during the two decades before the formation of the FGS. According to the NDP- 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
25
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
9, the country has one of the lowest baskets of health indicators in the world with an infant mortality 
rate of about 132 per 1,000 live births and a maternal mortality rate of 732 per 100,000 live births. The 
life expectancy at birth is 54 years for male and 57 years for female, according to the WHO. Access 
to healthcare is determined by the place of residence (rural, urban, IDP settlement camps), with 
variations across gender, regions and within IDPs; with rural residents’ worse off than the IDPs and 
urban residents respectively. 
Nutrition improvement: Good nutrition is a pre-requisite for adequate growth and development, 
health, learning capacity, work performance and a good overall quality of life. It is also an indicator of 
economic well-being. The nutritional outcome of the food eaten by an individual will be appropriate and 
optimum only when there is adequate diversity of the diet and proper feeding and caring are practiced. 
Nutrition provides energy, promotes growth, and nourishes the body. The nutritional status of a person 
is determined by multifaceted interactions among food availability, affordability, accessibility, 
consumption and infections. It influences an individual’s growth and development, productivity, 
reproductive success and susceptibility to diseases. Good nutritional status is critical for the growth 
and development of children, particularly those who are under two years of age. Nutritional deficiencies 
among children, especially those under five years of age, often lead to childhood illnesses such as 
diarrhoea, respiratory diseases and nutritional problems such as wasting and stunting40. On the other 
hand, women’s nutritional status has a direct effect on their health and the health of their children. 
Nutritional deficiencies among women can lead to anaemia, infections and pregnancy complications 
which could result in premature birth or death. 
According to HNO 2020, 1 in 10 children under the age of five are acutely malnourished with the median 
National GAM of 13.8 percent at Serious level, translating to 1.08M boys and girls of which 178,000 
are affected by life threatening severely malnutrition while 830,000 are moderately malnourished. A 
further 832,000 pregnant and lactating women are estimated to need nutrition assistance. 
The most affected by inadequate Food Security and Nutrition are mothers (especially pregnant and 
lactating), infants, young children, adolescent girls and women (49 percent are anemic). Women of 
childbearing age are highly vulnerable for two reasons. For one they either lactate or breastfeed  with 
hard and poor feeding condition. Secondly, it is in the tradition of many Somali households’ women 
are the last to eat. There should be government policies that particularly support women of childbearing 
age. Poor nutrition conditions amongst these population groups are the result of both shock and 
underlying factors, with conflict, political instability, displacement and changing climate conditions 
continuing to put immense pressure on access to basic services and intensifying exposure to nutritional 
deprivations. 
It is worth mentioning that the nutrition component under food security and nutrition policy provides 
policy measures related to the preventive and promotional aspects of nutrition improvement. The 
preventive aspects include the production and supply of nutrition foods such as vegetables, fruits, 
meat, fish and dairy products while the promotional aspect includes awareness raising among the 
population and through formal education (by way of curriculum development and demonstration plots/ 
farms whenever situations permit). 
Intra-household food distribution: It is not sufficient to have adequate supply of diversified and 
nutritious food within the household unless it is fairly distributed within the household taking in to 
consideration the needs of infants, children, pregnant and/or lactating mothers, the elderly and other 
sick persons. It is therefore important to ensure food is allocated to household members based on 
their nutritional needs to prevent malnutrition and diseases which may affect specific members of the 
household based on their sex and age. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
26
=== PAGE 36 ===
40 SHDS, 2020
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
Food storage, safety, and preparation: The food within the household custody need to be stored 
under optimal conditions to prevent insect pests and fungi (molds) which can easily damage or spoil 
both dry and fresh food grains, flours, fruits, vegetables, and tubers. Food should also be prepared in 
hygienic conditions to avoid contamination by disease-causing micro-organism. Due to the importance 
of food storage, safety, and preparation as well as the absence of regulations and guidelines; this 
policy document has developed policy statement and detailed measures to ensure attainment of Food 
Security and Nutrition. 
3.3.2. Policy Objective: To provide safe and nutritious food which meet individuals’ dietary needs with 
increased access to clean water, sanitation, and health facilities. 
3.3.3. Policy Statement: The government, in collaboration with development partners and the private 
sector, will endeavour to improve access to safe drinking water, sanitation and health facilities and 
nutrition information and interventions for ensuring proper utilization of food contributes to achieving 
household food security; 
3.3.4. Policy measures: In order to ensure proper utilization of food, especially to the most vulnerable 
(IDPs, mothers, infants, young children, adolescent girls and women) the government, in collaboration 
with development partners and the private sector will take the following measures: 
3.3.4.1. Water and Sanitation: 
i. 
Promote safe drinking water among rural and nomadic communities whose source of drinking 
water is unsafe; by treating water effectively at home, families can improve the quality of 
household drinking water as well as prevent the prevalence of water-borne diseases such as 
diarrhea and dysentery41. 
ii. 
Promote awareness of good hygiene and sanitation practices for behavioural change through 
public and private media; 
iii. 
Increase access to private and public/communal sanitary facilities frequented by group of people 
as well as sanitation services (drainage, sewage and solid waste management) to vulnerable 
communities through labor based public works programs; 
iv. 
Promote safe water-harvesting methods and practices 
v. 
Construct shallow-wells at the most appropriate locations 
vi. 
Rehabilitate public water sources 
vii. 
Encourage private sector investments in water sector development 
viii. 
Formulate national water sector policy/strategy 
3.3.4.2. Health care: 
i. 
Increase government expenditure to expand health care services across the country by 
prioritizing the most vulnerable and underserved communities. 
ii. 
Facilitate and support the private sector to increase access to health care for the most vulnerable 
through public-private partnership; 
iii. 
Establish legislation, regulation and standards to oversee the provision of health by private 
providers; 
3.3.4.3. Nutrition Improvement: 
i. 
Encourage the population, particularly the most vulnerable, through public awareness 
mechanisms, to understand the role of improved nutrition in preventing nutrition related diseases 
such as, child stunting and wasting; 
ii. 
Develop national dietary guidelines and standards. 
41 SHDS Report; 2020 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
27
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
iii. 
Promoting nutrition sensitive agriculture including the production and efficient utilization of 
indigenous nutritient rich foods including legumes, beans, seeds and other protein-rich food 
iv. 
Advocate and demonstrate appropriate technologies for the preparation of diversified nutritious 
food. 
v. 
Promote the consumption of protein-rich livestock products and fish to enrich diets; 
vi. 
Establish and ensure a reliable and affordable supply chain of dairy products, in particular, to 
improve the diet and nutrient levels of the poor and vulnerable. 
vii. 
Allocate budget for school feeding programs 
viii. 
Consider industrial fortification of foods with micronutrients, when feasible. 
3.4. Stability of food availability access and utilization 
Stability describes the temporal dimension of Food Security and Nutrition, i.e.; the timeframe over which 
Food Security and Nutrition is being considered. Stability is assured when the supply at household level 
remains constant in the sort-term as well as in the long-term (at all times). That includes food, income, 
and production resources. Factors which affect stability in the short term include floods, droughts, high 
prices, conflicts, inadequate food production, and epidemics. Long-term effects are related to climate 
change, land degradation, and deforestation, 
3.4.1. Policy context: 
Under the current situation, stability of food availability, access and utilization for the majority of Somalis 
is at risk of being interrupted at least temporarily or at one point during a year. Recurrent climatic 
shocks (draught and floods); insecurity and its attendant displacement, lack of incomes especially from 
agricultural labour wages triggered by insecurity, displacement, flooding and drought; and inadequate 
public investment in health care, water and sanitation contribute to unstable availability of and access 
to food during a year. But also in the long term; all undermine stability of supply, access and usage of 
food. 
The current unsustainable extensive mode of production (both crops and livestock) without proportional 
investment in conservation and management of the resource base (mainly land, water, pasture) will 
reduce the productivity of the resource base; eventually undermining stability of food availability. Thus 
there is a great need to formulate and implement appropriate measures to ensure stability is assured 
now and in the future. 
3.4.2. Policy Objective: to ensure uninterrupted or continuous supply of and access to safe and 
nutritious food. 
3.4.3. Policy Statement: The government will ensure that stability of food supply, access, and usage 
are safeguarded through the agriculture, livestock, fisheries, trade, health, infrastructure, social 
protection, and related socio-economic sectors on yearly basis while investing in natural resource 
management and environmental conservation for long-term stability. 
3.4.4. Policy Measures: In order to ensure stability of food supply and access in the short-term while 
safeguarding the future food security situation, the government will: 
3.4.4.1. Identify critical conditions which have the potential to disrupt supply, access and utilization 
and closely work with development partners and the private sector to ensure those conditions are 
addressed; 
3.4.4.2. Strengthen its early warning systems and coordinate with development partners to respond to 
predictable emergencies while humanitarian affairs and disaster management ministry would facilitate 
to close food gaps through its social protection mechanisms; 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
28
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
3.4.4.3. Invest in natural resource management, integrated watershed management, and climate 
change adaptation to ensure land-based resources remain productive to support agricultural and 
livestock production in the long-term; 
3.4.4.4. Promote short-term measures which can build the resilience of households and communities 
through crop and livestock insurances42 (against drought and crop failure); and social protection 
measures (or productive social safety nets). 
3.4.4.5. If recommended by a comprehensive study, introduce and operationalize strategic food 
reserve with the aim of provision of emergency food aid and temporary market stabilization. 
42 
Ethiopia and Kenya have developed livestock insurance schemes Index-based livestock Insurance (IBLI) and Satellite 
Index Insurance for pastoralists in Ethiopia (SIIPE); and the Kenya Livestock Insurance Program (KLIP) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
29
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
Section 4: Policies supporting Food Security and Nutrition 
4.1. 
Food Safety, standards, and quality control 
Food safety and quality at all stages of the food chain is one of the paramount pillars in national food 
security policy and must be more actively embraced at all levels of the food production, processing, 
marketing and home preparation and handling chain by all those involved from the public and private 
sectors, and by consumers. Food production poisoning-related incidences due to wrong application of 
pesticides and poor storage system, consumption of expired food items are widespread resulting in 
the emergence of acute and chronic diseases.  Similarly, poor hygiene and inappropriate food  and 
livestock feed and fodder handling and storage contributes to spoilage and consumption of poor quality 
foods posing serious health risks (such as diarrhea, cholera and aflatoxicosis). 
4.1.1. Policy context 
During the former government of Somalia, there were well-structured and organized food inspection 
centers at seaports, airports and country borders that are currently nonfunctioning. Due to this vacuum, 
it is common that irresponsible traders import contaminated food commodities, poor agrochemicals 
(fertilizers and pesticides) and expired seeds or genetically modified seeds directly into the country 
that had highly negative significant impact on the safety and health of many innocent people. 
Many people yearly die in diseases associated with contaminated foods and other food- borne diseases. 
Recently the people dying of cancer are drastically increasing and this can be partially attributed to 
the consumption of unsafe foods. The absence of the food safety and quality control and regulatory 
framework in the country also prevented Somali agro-businessmen to take advantage of international 
trade opportunities due to their failure to comply with the international standard requirement. For 
example, Saudi Arabia banned several times the Somali livestock exportation to its country because 
of lack of reliable quarantines centers in Somalia. Similarly, Somali banana exportation has been 
stagnant since 1991 because of the absent of food safety and quality control authority in the country, 
whose duties were supposed to conduct validation, inspection and certification of both import and 
export food commodities. 
If the necessary institutional, policy, and regulatory, and legal frameworks are developed, improvements 
in food safety and quality control will lead to more diverse diets, improved consumer health and 
nutrition, new opportunities for local and export trade, and ultimately to enhanced food security and 
good nutrition. 
4.1.2. Policy Objective: To provide the public and international consumers with safe and quality food 
ascertained through regulations and quality standards. 
4.1.3. Policy Statement: The government recognizes the right of its people to safe food. The 
government will ensure that safe food trade practice are conducted in manner consistent with World 
Trade Organization’s Sanitary and Phytosanitary measures and other international requirements to 
safeguard consumers through the realization of the objectives of the food security and safety policy. 
4.1.4. Policy measures: the government will take the following measures: 
4.1.4.1. Establish Institutional Framework for food safety and quality standard. 
Somalia does not have food safety or quality control after the civil war although the needs in this service 
are very critical for the nations. Currently there is ongoing initiative that is aimed at establishment a 
National Food Safety and Quality Control Authority in order to improve the safety and quality of both 
the locally produced food and imported food commodities. In order to improve food safety and quality 
control at national and member state level, the Government will: 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
30
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
i. 
Finalise the establishment of National Food Safety and Quality Control Authority 
ii. 
Recruit and train qualified staff on food safety and quality control techniques 
iii. 
Develop institutional frameworks to enhance linkages between regulatory agencies and food 
producing/processing industries. 
iv. 
Promote safe practices in food production (crop, livestock and fisheries). 
v. 
Promote proper storage and handling to control incidents of food-related disease outbreaks. 
vi. 
Establish risk analysis policy toward the food safety and quality control 
vii. Prioritize resumption of the validation, inspection and certification of imported and exported food 
commodities. 
viii. Provide clear guidelines on the production and utilization of genetically modified products 
ix. 
Promote public-private sector partnerships for improved food safety and quality control; 
x. 
Develop the national food safety and quality control policy; 
xi. 
Develop guidelines, code of conduct and practices and standards that relate to food, food products 
and nutrition services. 
4.1.4.2. Develop Legal and Regulatory Framework for Food Safety and quality control 
Somalia forever lacked the legal and regulatory framework for food safety and quality control therefore, 
to ensure that the National food supply meets the highest safety requirement for both domestic 
consumption and international demands; the government will: 
i. 
Formulate national pesticides law and act through the approval by the federal parliament and 
cabinet ministers; 
ii. 
Formulate legislative framework and regulation in relation to food imports and exports, food 
hygiene and labelling that comply with the domestic and international demand through the federal 
parliament and cabinet minister’s approval; 
iii. 
Issue Decree-Law on quality control of nationally produced, imported or exported food through the 
federal parliament and cabinet minister’s approval; 
iv. 
Issue Fishery Products Importation and Exportation Regulations through the federal parliament 
and cabinet minister’s approval; 
v. 
Develop functional food safety coordination mechanism among the government and non- 
government agencies involved in food production, processing, exportation and importation; 
vi. 
Develop regulatory and institutional framework to improve guidelines, coordination and 
enforcement, including food labelling. 
vii. Address the range of urban food safety and quality control by formalising and regulating producers 
and vendors. 
4.1.4.3. Initiate functional and effective traceability mechanisms: 
Traceability is the ability to trace and follow food, feed, and ingredients through all stages of production, 
processing and distribution. In Somalia, the identification of the origin of the imported food sources is 
the prime importance for protection of food consumers since it facilitates the withdrawal of unsafe foods 
and enables consumers to be provided with target and accurate information on specific product. 
Therefore, government will: 
i. 
Restore the quality control centres at country borders, airports and seaports 
ii. 
Release appropriate information and alert the public on black-listed food types and their origins 
iii. 
Prevent such practices by importers 
4.1.4.4. Provide Functional Laboratory support service 
The effective enforcement of food legislation and the implementation of food-borne disease surveillance 
systems require sound and efficient food analysis capabilities at federal and member state levels which 
is absent in Somalia. The majority of public health laboratories do not have the capacity to test for 
chemical contaminants and naturally occurring toxins/poisoning. Therefore, the federal government 
will: 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
31
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
i. 
Promote establishment of adequate number laboratories; 
ii. 
Allocate specific budget to the establishment of the laboratories for food safety and quality 
control; 
iii. 
Provide capacity building for the newly recruited lab technicians to undertake formal risk analysis 
and improve the national capacity in terms of effectively participation in international standard 
requirement. 
4.2. Food storage, processing, preservation, and value addition 
Postharvest food loss is a global phenomenon and is not restricted to Somalia. The quantitative food 
loss in sub-Saharan Africa has been estimated at 100 million metric tons per year. For grains alone, 
the value of post-harvest losses are estimated to equate to approximately USD 4 billion/year (at 2007 
prices), which could meet the annual food requirements of about 48 million people and exceeds the 
annual value of grain imports into Africa and the value of total food aid received in sub-Saharan Africa 
over the past two decades43. 
4.2.1. Policy context 
In Somalia, the postharvest losses are substantial across the all production sectors including agriculture, 
livestock and fish. Most farmers in southern Somalia store a high portion of their harvested grains into 
underground pits that cause severe deterioration in the grain quantity and quality due to pests, rodents 
and other micro-organisms attack. The traditional underground storage pits lined with clay are highly 
prone to moisture contamination, particularly during the rainy season, and contamination from 
aflatoxin, other bacteria, and fungi. The health hazards caused by poor storage include stunted growth, 
delayed development, and liver damage and cancer that are more serious effects than the economic 
loss. 
The average annual cereal losses in southern Somalia are estimated to 50,000–80,000 tons per year 
which valued at $15–$20 million, and representing about 20–30 percent of the harvest44. According to 
the Somali Agricultural Technical Group (SATG), the losses associated with traditional storage systems 
such as underground pits are significantly higher (40 percent) than losses associated with downstream 
harvesting, transportation, and drying (20 percent). 
On the other hand, the postharvest losses in fruits, vegetables and root crops is very high and can 
reach 50% due to the lack of appropriate processing technologies, poor handling, deterioration during 
the transportation from the field to markets and lack of fruits and vegetable processing plants/factories 
in the country. Although statistical and monetary evidences are lacking, similar post-harvest and 
storage losses are very common in the livestock and fisheries sectors. 
Food processing and preservation is another area which needs urgent attention as opportunities for 
domestic as well as foreign markets look promising with cautious safety and quality control to meet 
the required standards (especially for export). The processing and preservation of livestock and fisher 
products is generally underdeveloped for a number of reasons discussed under the previous sections. 
Cereal and sesame processing, meat, milk and fish processing, preservation and value addition all 
have the potential to meet nutritional needs as well as job creation and income generation, especially for 
women and young people. If investments are made, import substitution, for example, from sesame oil 
and milk, could save the much needed foreign currency. However, the poor state of rural infrastructure 
and energy requirements have hampered the active involvement of the private sector for efficient 
processing, preservation, and value addition. These constraints and challenges should be addressed 
jointly by the government (through its incentives as provided under the investment law) and the private 
sector (including commercial banks and micro finance institutions for small scale processing). 
43 
Postharvest Loss Management Strategy, African Union Commission (August 2018) 
44 
Somali Agricultural Technical Group (SATG), 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
32
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
4.2.2. Policy Objective: reduce food losses due to storage, processing, and preservation; increase 
food quality. 
4.2.3. Policy statement: The government will promote and provide incentives through its investment 
law, to domestic as well as foreign investors to ensure proper storage; processing, preservation, and 
value addition contribute to increased availability of and access to affordable, safe and nutritious food; 
as well as increased employment/jobs incomes and revenue from domestic and foreign trade. 
4.2.4. Policy measures: in order to reduce post-harvest loses through improved storage, and promote 
efficient processing, preservation and value addition, the government will: 
4.2.4.1. Post-harvest and storage improvement: 
i. 
Promote awareness of the impact, economic value and consequence of postharvest losses on 
food security and poverty reduction; 
ii. 
Encourage research, adapt and disseminate technologies to reduce post-harvest losses; 
iii. 
Explore effective and improved (affordable) storage facilities both at household and commercial 
scales; 
iv. 
Rehabilitate the old storage centers and substation and also build new storage centers throughout 
the agriculture production areas 
v. 
Train agriculture extension staff on good practices in post-harvest loss reduction, design and 
develop simple technologies for processing food at the household level for dissemination to the 
farmers and agro-pastoralist; 
vi. 
Improve fruit postharvest handling by farm labourers and technician 
vii. Encourage the private sector to import proven safe pesticides with no side effects for use in 
storage while encourage farmers to apply these pesticides in their stores 
4.2.4.2. Processing, preservation, and value addition 
i.   Encourage and support private sector investments in cold storage facilities for meat, milk and   fish 
preservation and value addition through exemption of customs duties and removal of trade 
barriers; 
viii. Encourage investments and promote sesame oil, dried lemon, and dried banana processing and 
packaging, especially for export. 
ix. 
Encourage private sectors investments in processing infrastructure such as grain mills, fruit juice 
extractors and canning equipment, 
x. 
Rehabilitate feeder roads and main roads from rural producers (of crops, livestock and fisheries) 
to the near-by trading centres; 
xi. 
Build cold chains and adequate storage facilities at key towns at seacoast to support fishing 
communities; 
xii. Maintain current policy of exempting agro-processing machinery from customs duties and 
consider other policy incentives such as preferential energy rates or reduced road taxes that can 
stimulate private investment in modernization and cold storage facilities; 
xiii. Promote the use of renewable energy like solar or wind power to help reduce energy costs and 
allow for expansion of cold chain and storage facilities that would improve outputs and economic 
performance; 
xiv. Facilitate access to credit to small and medium size enterprises engaged in agricultural value 
chain as well as in processing and value addition of meat, dairy, and fish products, 
xv. Develop and sustain the supply chain and value chain of agricultural production, meat, milk and 
fish production to increase both domestic consumption and export; 
xvi. Enhance the capacity of the institutions involved in product development, standards establishment 
and monitoring of quality. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
33
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
4.3. 
Humanitarian food aid management 
Every year, many Somalis face hardship during lean seasons and after food and nutrition crises 
triggered by drought, flooding, market shocks and political and resource-based conflict. In the past 30 
years. The different types of food aid intervention include school meals provided in food insecure areas 
in the country as an incentive for children to attend school regularly, Food for Work initiatives 
(conditional food aid), unconditional food distribution to the crises affected people, and cash transfer to 
allow the IDPs and other beneficiaries to address their diverse needs in an efficient and comprehensive 
manner. 
4.3.1. Policy Context 
Undoubtedly, emergency food aid has saved the lives of millions of people who would die of hunger 
and malnutrition if they had not received food assistance from the outside but the greatest concern 
around food aid is the possibility that it may undermine the livelihoods of local poor farmers thereby 
creating a disincentive to producers, leading to reduced domestic production of food and damaging 
the livelihoods of local farmers through flooding markets and depressing prices. Substantial volumes 
of food aid provided over a long-term basis could hamper local production, result in increased poverty 
and create long-term food insecurity due to increased dependence on food aid. While the overall 
humanitarian aid coordination and implementation is under the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs,     the 
food security sector has technical responsibilities to ensure food aid does not undermine food 
production, because, if it is not well managed, food aid will have some negative impacts observed in 
other countries which include: 
1. Provision of food aid at harvesting time can compete with domestic crops resulting in hampering 
the local production and distortion of local market price. Price distortion of domestic foods will enforce 
many farmers to terminate growing of stable crops like maize and sorghum. 
2. Food aid often arrives late when the situation has improved and this type of assistance is no longer 
so badly needed. This delay may result in inappropriate timely response to the emergency 
humanitarian disaster where weeks or even days can mean the difference between life and death of 
many vulnerable people. In order to address to these problem, some NGOs and UN agencies started 
cash transfer donation. 
3. Unless justified for a number of reasons (including security, availability, and logistics), food aid 
(sorghum and maize) could be procured from local farmers rather than importing them from abroad. 
Local procurement will stimulate local production while indirectly benefits other sectors such as 
packaging, loading and off-loading, and transportation. 
4.3.2. Policy objectives: to control food aid to alleviate temporary food crises and ensure good 
quality and safety of donated food by targeting those who cannot feed themselves for reasons beyond 
their control. 
4.3.3. Policy Statement: the government will ensure that food aid is delivered at the right time, not to 
interfere with local market prices, while ensuring such aid is designed to enable target beneficiaries 
become resilient, re-build their livelihood assets and gradually recover from crisis. 
4.3.4. Policy Measures: in order to ensure humanitarian aid is managed in the most appropriate 
manner and in line with international principles and practices, the government, in collaboration with the 
humanitarian community will: 
i. 
Ensure that when designing and delivering humanitarian assistance attention must be given to 
protecting assets, rebuilding livelihoods, and achieve food security. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
34
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
ii. 
Advice that food aid should not be distributed at harvesting time to avoid its negative impact on the 
domestic crop prices unless the situation on the ground dictates. 
iii. 
Ensure that food aid arrives at the right time to right place; targeted to the right beneficiaries and 
used in the right form 
iv. 
Persuade the humanitarian organizations to procure domestic food (maize and sorghum and 
cooking oil made of sesame) from surplus producing areas. This will depend on the availability, 
quality, cost-effectiveness, logistical and security issues. 
v. 
Ensure that local community benefit from institutionalized community-based disaster preparedness 
and early warning systems 
vi. 
Ensure that crisis-affected people receive safety-net assistance in the form of conditional or 
unconditional cash-based transfers that improve their food security and nutrition status; 
vii. 
Promote a coordinated approach to planning and management of food aid importation; 
viii. Ensure that food aid conforms to the bio-safety (genetic modified food and seeds) and other related 
legislations 
ix. 
Make sure the integration of early recovery interventions in all humanitarian assistance to reduce 
the dependency of vulnerable people on constant food aid 
x. 
Ensure that food aid does not create “dependency syndrome” where by beneficiaries expect to be 
fed by food aid while the situation improves for self-sustenance. 
xi. 
Will create conditions to empower the local communities with resilience against future shocks and 
to focus on long-term development 
4.4. National Agricultural Research and Extension Services 
The role of agriculture research centre is to carry out research on all crops grown in Somalia such as 
introducing of new improved varieties, propagation and distribution of selected cultivars, provision of 
plant quarantine, soil survey and analytical services, and seed inspection and testing services whereas 
the national agriculture extension services (NES) was responsible for the transfer of the improved 
farming technology developed by research center to the farmers, provision of extension services for the 
small and large scale farmers. Livestock research is also responsible for generating improved breeds for 
meat and milk; livestock fodder, and related technologies and practices. Same principles of research are 
necessary for the fisheries sector. 
The absence of the role of national extension services had adverse effect on the food security of the 
country as farmers had no choice other than to pursue their traditional poor farming techniques during 
the last three decades. Before the civil war of 1991, the national agriculture extension had fully functional 
offices in 10 agricultural regions (six have potential for irrigation, while the other four relied wholly on rain 
fail). In these 10 regions, 33 districts had potential for both crop and on-farm livestock production. At 
each district level, there was Extension Officer, a Plant Protection Officer, a Land and Water Officer and 
a Cooperative Officer under a District Agricultural Officer who was responsible to the Regional 
Agricultural Coordinator. The national agriculture extension service had also different training centers in 
the country that were designed for the transfer of modern agriculture technology to the farmers. All these 
services are now missing leaving the farming community with no options for improved technology. 
The Livestock sector in the country was poorly developed and warrant a great deal of attention as the 
sector is providing both domestic revenue and foreign currency in addition to satisfying the food security 
needs of the population. 
4.4.1. Policy context 
Following the collapse of the former government in 1991, all the research and extension activities in the 
country collapsed; and. numerous research findings that offered hope for appropriate and meaningful 
crop intervention strategies were lost. Most of the researchers and subordinate staffs left the country 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
35
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
although some of them are still in the country. The Linkages of national agricultural research and 
extension services to outside research institutions had to be discontinued for almost three decades and 
consequently there is very limited access to information relating to new technologies and changes that 
have taken place in the international agricultural research agenda in recent years. 
Due to the absence of research and extension services, farmers faced many agronomical problems. For 
long time, they did not receive agriculture extension service to assist them in seed variety selection, soil 
testing, production practices, pest and disease control,post-harvest handling, water management and 
moisture conservation, value addition and other crop production aids. All these factors led to significant 
reduction of domestic food production with corresponding negative impact of both food availability and 
accessibility by the local community. The same is true for the livestock and fisheries sectors 
Therefore, there are urgent needs to re-establish the National Agricultural Research and extension 
services to promote sustainable agricultural development that guarantees food security, income and 
employment generation, agricultural export enhancement through the development and dissemination 
of appropriate and environmentally friendly agricultural technological packages to the farmers. This will 
involve prioritization of the major agricultural research issues that address farmers’ needs. Agriculture 
research and extension services will play a crucial role in the generation of improved new farming 
technology and the delivery and effective adoption by farmers with research technologies. 
The Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range (MOFR) currently lacks the resources and human 
capacity, including highly qualified and experienced technical advisors and consultants, to establish and 
support badly needed research institutions that can provide livestock producers with modern breeding 
products to strengthen the animal population’s resilience to fast changing environmental conditions. 
The development of fisheries sector has been partly constrained by the lack of fisheries research. 
Currently, there is no research institute dedicated to fisheries in Somalia nor are other research centers 
that can conduct fisheries research. Little research is being carried out, though there are some staff 
members at MoFMR who are designated to perform research activities and data collection. 
4.4.2. Policy Objective: build the institutional, technical and human resource capacities of national 
agricultural research and extension (including livestock and fisheries research) to generate affordable 
and accessible inputs, technologies, and practices to significantly boost production and productivity; 
addressing critical gaps of the productive sector and stimulating the private sector. 
4.4.3. Policy Statement: the government, in collaboration with regional and international partners45 is 
committed to re-establish the national agricultural research centres to assure future food security for all 
Somali citizens through generation of adaptive research, knowledge, and technology transfer that 
directly related to the needs of the production sectors ( agriculture, livestock and fish). 
4.4.4. Policy measures 
4.4.4.1. Re-establish the National Agriculture Research Centers 
The agricultural research centers that existed prior to the civil war are dilapidated. Before the civil  war, 
there were three Agriculture research substations developed in the major agricultural zones of Somalia 
namely; Alexandria substation that was based near Gelib town (middle Jubba region), the Bonka 
substation that was located near the city of Baidoa (Bay Region) and Aburein substation that was 
located near Hargheisa (North West Region-Somaliland) while the headquarter was located in Afgoi 
district in lower Shabelle region. To realize the restoration of the role agriculture research in the national 
food security optimization, the government will: 
45 Regional partners include ILRI (Kenya & Ethiopia); CAADP Pillar 4 facilities and the Consultative group on Agricultural Research 
(CGIAR) which has more than 20 specialized research institutes and centers in selected countries. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
36
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
i. Rehabilitate the headquarter and sub stations of the Agriculture research centers and provide with 
all the essential equipment and materials for the research works 
ii. Introduce, test, domesticate and disseminate new technologies suitable to the local conditions 
iii. Lobby for allocation of agricultural research budget and seek additional financial and technical 
support 
iv. Will employ on-farm participatory approaches whereby the farming communities will contribute to 
technology development to ensure relevance and user adaptability 
v. Ensure sustainable national research capacity through the human resource development 
vi. Focus on institution building/human resources development (Recruiting of the research scientist 
and other project staff and training them) 
4.4.4.2. Support the establishment of an independent Somali Livestock Research Institute (SLRI) with 
Somali and foreign scientists from different specializations, capable to researching the sector’s 
challenges and needs using the latest techniques and methods and advising governments on suitable 
interventions. 
4.4.4.3. Establish national and regional (member state level) research centers: to enhance fisheries 
sector development, research centers should be equipped with professional staff and the required 
infrastructure and technology/equipment. Initially, the Center could be under one of the national 
research centers until independent centers are justified and government capacity permits. 
4.4.4.4. Encourage and support the emergence of private research companies: 
i. While revitalizing government research centers, support private companies which already stated 
developing and distributing improved seeds; 
i. Identify competent private companies which can be contracted to multiply certified  seeds approved 
by companies or research centres in the east Africa region, with strict supervision and quality 
control. 
4.4.4.5. Strengthen partnership and cooperation with Regional and international research and donors 
Successful reestablishment and implementation of the National Agricultural research will depend   on 
the level of partnership relationship with the International agriculture research institutions Donor 
communities, UN agencies, and international and local Organizations and the private sectors. Before 
the civil war, agriculture research and extension institutes had strong relationship and partnerships 
with several international organization and research institutions. Therefore, the government will: 
i. 
Promote the partnership with regional and international institutions and donors which were 
supporting the country with both financial and technical assistance such as FAO, African 
Development Bank, ICRISAT, Arab Organizations for Agriculture Development, World Bank, and 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) etc. 
ii. 
Promote partnership and cooperation with the most relevant international research institutions 
under the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and other in 
dependent organizations. 
iii. 
Put in place a coordination framework and a protocol to link with the national agriculture research 
and other regional and international agricultural research institutions in the neighboring countries 
such as Ethiopia, Kenya, Egypt and Gulf States as key collaborators in research activities. 
4.4.4.6. Rehabilitate Agricultural Extension Services head quarter and substations 
To revitalize the role of the agriculture extension services in local production and food availability, the 
government will: 
i. 
Rehabilitate the headquarter and sub stations of the national extension services in the country 
ii. 
Recruit and train qualified extension workers on participatory extension service delivery as 
opposed to top-down extension message delivery system. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
37
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
iii. 
Transfer improved farming technology to both small and large scale farmers that are relevant to their 
needs by using different extension methodologies for the training of the farmers; 
iv. 
Provide management assistance on account-keeping, financial control, input procurement, marketing 
of crops and farm planning for large scale farmers. 
v. 
Promote the participation and partnership with the private sector in extension service delivery 
vi. 
Promote agricultural education in vocational training centers 
vii. Restore and maintain effective linkages between extension and research; and between input supply 
enterprises and extension agents. 
viii. Rehabilitation of Aburrin Farmer Training Center 
ix. 
Promote gender mainstreaming in the agriculture sector to enhance women participation in sector 
activities in recognition of the critical role they play in family household management and food 
production to empower them to participate more effectively in agricultural production and marketing 
by employing innovative methods for reaching women. 
x. 
Facilitate effective participation of the private sectors, NGOs and international agencies to 
complement the gaps in extension services 
4.5. Khat consumption and its socio-economic effects 
Khat (Catha edulis) is a slow growing flowering plant (shrub) native to the Horn of Africa and the Arabian 
Peninsula. It contains the alkaloid cathinone, a stimulant, which is said to cause excitement, loss of 
appetite, and euphoria. The World Health Organization (WHO) classified it in 1980 as a drug of abuse 
that can produce psychological dependence. Its fresh leaves and tops are chewed or, less frequently, 
dried and consumed as tea, to achieve a state of euphoria and stimulation; it also has anorectic (appetite- 
reducing) side effects. The consumers get a feeling of well-being, mental alertness and excitement. The 
after-chewing effects, however, are usually insomnia, numbness and lack of concentration. 
4.5.1. Policy context 
Khat consumption (chewing) is an insidious habit that affects food security and livelihood of many families 
in Somalia. With its adverse social, economic and medical consequences it has become a problem of 
grave national concern. The annual imports of this poisonous plant cost hundreds of millions of dollars 
per year in Somalia. For example, according to the then Minister of Planning and International 
Cooperation of Somaliland, in the year 2010 only Somaliland spent 450 million USD on khat imports46. In 
that same year, Somaliland’s trade deficit was 500 million USD47. In 2012, Somalia spent more than 300 
million $US on direct Khat imports in spite of the difficult economic situation at that time48. For Somalia, 
according to NDP-9, Khat is the second largest imported product after sugar49. In addition, the economic 
problems associated with Khat-chewing include the amount of money diverted to purchase Khat instead 
of food (less money would be available for food purchased); the spread of corruption, the theft of public 
and private property to support the habit and the loss of many working hours among civil servants and 
private employees. 
In the social sphere, family disruption is a prominent problem which includes frequent quarrels, breach 
of family ties, neglect of the education and care of children, family instability and household poverty, 
diverting household money away from productive investments, and enabling the purchase of weapons50. 
These factors may lead to family breakup, loss of working hours, and negative effects on children’s lives 
in many aspects51. 
 
46 Official statement of the Minister (Dr. Saad Ali Shire) at the joint Somaliland - World Bank conference on the Somaliland economic 
growth held in Hargeisa in 2014 
47 Ibid 
48 Kafi, N., & Mberia, H. (2016). Effects of khat consumption on household socioeconomic development in Garowe District, Puntland, 
Somalia. International Journal of Contemporary Applied Sciences , (ISSN: 2308-1365) 
49 NDP -9 (p47) 
50 A. S. Elmi, “Khat: spreading, epidemiology and problems in Somalia”, in Proceedings of the Second International Congress on 
Somali Studies, T. Labahn, ed. (Hamburg, Helmut Buske Verlag, 1984), pp. 271-286. 
51 Pantelis, C., Hindler, C. G., & Taylor, J. C. (1989). Use and abuse of khat (Catha edulis): A review of the distribution, pharmacology, 
side effects and a description of psychosis attributed to khat chewing. Psychological Medicine, 19(3), 657–668. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
38
=== PAGE 49 ===
S0033291700024259
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
Imagine if the fiscal budget for Khat chewing could be used for the national development; how   many 
potential national infrastructures could be constructed/rehabilitated including irrigation canals, 
construction of schools, hospitals etc? How much the local production would increase if this money 
could be diverted to the production sectors, health and water security? Somali scholars have argued 
that if Somalia did not import Khat, the country would save millions of dollars every day, the people 
who work would contribute their full income to their families and there would be a significant impact on 
work performance as that promotes economic growth resulting in food security improvement at 
national and at household level. Families and couples would be more stable, fathers would be more 
aware of their children and how they are performing in education. The overall health of the nation 
would also be improved, further improving socio-economic conditions in Somalia52. 
With regard to the effects of Khat on health, there is concern that people who do not wash khat before 
consuming it will ingest pesticides. Such pesticides contribute to cancers of the digestive system  and 
kidney failure among Khat chewers. Deaths have been reported that were caused by poisoning 
following the ingestion of pesticides and/or fertilisers used in the cultivation of khat. Leaves are normally 
chewed fresh without any treatments (such as washing, soaking in hot water, or thermal treatments) to 
reduce the concentration of such chemicals, both in producing and consuming countries. For instance, 
an analysis of khat grown in different parts of Ethiopia in 2009 found excessive levels of pesticide 
residues in some producing areas53. 
Although Khat importation and distribution within Somalia generates domestic tax revenue, its negative 
socio-economic and inter-generational consequences outweigh its financial benefits. In this case, the 
government at all levels should take appropriate policy measures to safeguard current and future 
generations from increasing trends of Khat consumption. 
4.5.2. Policy objectives: to minimize the socio-economic impact of Khat consumption throughout the 
country. 
4.5.3. Policy statement: The Federal Government of Somalia, in collaboration with Federal Member 
States will ensure that Khat local production, importation, and consumption are gradually reduced to 
promote family cohesion, save foreign currency and build disciplined workforce in all productive socio- 
economic activities in both rural and urban areas. 
4.5.4. Policy measures: in order to reduce consumption and importation of Khat, the government will: 
i. 
Conduct comprehensive study to establish local production of khat (area under cultivation, no  of 
farmers, production levels, water requirements, etc); estimated number of consumers, etc. to 
formulate national program to deal with Khat production and consumption; 
ii. 
Establish a comprehensive national programme (or framework) for the regulated use and control 
of importation, cultivation and trade of the drug through the provision of information and education; 
iii. Impose heavy taxes on Khat imports to minimize the quantity being imported as well as to save 
foreign currency; 
iv. Create income generation opportunities for the local distributers/sellers of khat such as women- 
headed households who are currently involved in selling of khat in the local markets; 
v. 
Conduct continues anti-Khat campaign and community mobilization through available media 
outlets to ensure negative impacts and consequences of khat consumption is well understood by 
various communities and the society at large; 
vi. Promote active participation of government and civil society participation in national and 
international meetings pertinent to the problems of khat. 
52 Said Sheikh Aden Awale and Ali Yassin Sheikh Ali (Social and Economic Difficulties Caused by Khat Usage in Somalia 
53 Overview of literature and information on “khat-related” mortality: a call for recognition of the issue and further research; John M., 
et al. 2011; https://www.scielosp.org/pdf/aiss/2011.v47n4/445-464/en 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
39
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
4.6. Conflict Management and Peace Building 
There is a multidimensional and complex relationship between conflict and food security. Conflict and 
insecurity directly affect food security, while food insecurity has both direct and indirect effects on 
peace and security depending on the local context. There have been different types of conflicts  in 
different areas including politically motivated conflicts, clan-based conflicts, and, resource based 
conflicts. These conflicts manifest themselves in various forms such as the competition over the 
leadership of the country; disputes among political entities over borders and territory, control over 
natural resources, as well as clan tensions over control of nascent administrations. Regardless of the 
type of conflicts, insecurity and displacement are the main consequences of those conflicts and the 
resulting insecurity 
4.6.1 Policy context 
The Somali civil war and deadly conflicts after the collapse of the government in 1991 had strong 
adverse impacts on Food Security and Nutrition, hunger, and overall sustainable development. 
Regardless of the type of conflict, however, conflicts created insecurity and massive displacements of 
rural agricultural producers which led to reduced domestic food production and supplies; disrupted 
local coping strategies and livelihood options; limited access to traditional social support systems and 
entitlements; and reduced access to food especially for those who entirely depend on markets for their 
food (eg, pastoralists must buy cereals from markets). It caused the loss of thousands of lives, injuries, 
the lifelong impact of malnutrition, displacement, theft or destruction of farming and productive assets, 
and damage to infrastructure. 
On the other hand, during the last 30 years the marine resources along the Somali coastline have 
been regularly plundering by foreign trawlers and other types of ships few of which are licensed and 
most of which break international fishing laws. These illegal fishing close to the sea shore and destroy 
the nets and boats of the Somali fishermen resulting in extremely difficult to sustain their livelihood. All 
of the illegal ships are well armed and when the foreign fishing see the Somali boats approach to them, 
they open fire to them resulting in killing and injuring of the fishermen. Some of the foreign trawlers 
spray Somali fishermen with boiling water from cannons. This forced many fisheries whose livelihood 
was depend on the fishing to stay close to the coast, maybe two miles from the shore to avoid the 
military ships and the big foreign fishing vessels. It is worth to mention that illegal fishing and dumping 
by foreign vessels was the original motivation for fishermen to become pirates. 
The challenges posed by conflict and violence to achieving food security for all have been recognized 
by NDP-9 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development since conflict inhibit sustainable 
development. One of the 2030 agenda goals is to significantly reduce all forms of violence by working 
with member states and communities to find lasting solutions to conflict and insecurity. The 2030 
Agenda sees the eradication of poverty and hunger (Sustainable Development Goals [SDGs] 1 and 2) 
as preconditions to ensuring peaceful and inclusive societies (SDG 16); avoiding conflict and violence 
are seen as critical to achieving all of the other SDGs54 
Unless comprehensive and inclusive mechanisms are developed and enforced, conflict and its 
attendant insecurity and displacement remain serious threats to Food Security and Nutrition both at 
local and national levels. It is true that one of the most affected sectors by the ongoing conflict is the 
food security sector (manly agriculture, livestock, fisheries, water & sanitation, trade, etc). However, it 
is beyond the scope of the Food Security sector to address and manage such conflicts of a complex 
nature and deep rooted over the last 3 decades. 
Therefore, addressing conflict and insecurity in a sustainable manner requires comprehensive conflict 
management and peace building strategy with linkages to the national Reconciliation Framework, 
54 http://www.fao.org/3/a-i7821e.pdf 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
40
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
focusing on key areas of security, political governance; resource-based conflict management, economic 
development and justice are required in order to build a durable peace in Somalia. The Strategy need 
to define goals, objectives and expected results with clear institutional arrangements or structures for 
implementation for ensuring sustainability of its operations. 
4.6.2. Policy objectives: To ensure peace, security and stability prevail through a comprehensive 
conflict management and peace building strategy or plan of action (whatever the name may be) for 
achieving sustainable Food Security and Nutrition. 
4.6.3. Policy statement: The federal government of Somalia will put maximum efforts in order to 
significantly reduce all forms of conflict and insecurity with the aim of to restoring peace, security, and 
stability throughout the country so that all Somalis live in dignity and work without fear of insecurity 
and displacement. 
4.6.4. Policy measures: It is beyond the scope of this policy to provide clear-cut or specific policy 
measures to address the root causes of the chronic conflicts and peace building strategies. Therefore, 
it recommends the development and enforcement of a comprehensive national framework for conflict 
management and peace building with the following elements: 
i. 
Resource-based conflict management strategies: formulated on the basis of customary laws and 
practices in managing access to agricultural land, pasture/grazing land, and water resources; 
ii. Equitable national wealth/resources/budget distribution with the objective of ensuring access to 
rural infrastructure; health, water and sanitation; education; and job opportunities; 
iii. Creation of self-employment opportunities for the rural youth through training, provision of micro- 
finance, and market access; 
iv. Access to justice and the rule of law; 
v. 
A thorough analysis of pull factors such as youth unemployment, small arms trade, political 
marginalization, etc. 
4.7. Land tenure security 
Land tenure is the relationship that individuals and groups hold with respect to land and land-based 
resources, such as trees, minerals, pastures, and water. Land tenure rules define the ways in which 
property rights to land are allocated, transferred, used, or managed in a particular society. Tenure 
systems define who can hold and use resources, for what length of time, and under what conditions. 
These rules may be well defined or ambiguous and open to misinterpretation and exploitation. When 
both formal and informal systems exist within a society, tenure rules can be overlapping leading to 
confusion and insecurity. Land tenure may also vary by gender, ethnicity, class, and political affiliation. 
Secure land and resource rights can be a cornerstone for economic growth and an incentive for 
investment provide positive incentives to invest in and conserve valuable resources, including land, 
pastures, and forests. Conversely, when these rights are insecure, it can lead to conflicts, instability 
and the exclusion of vulnerable groups, such as women, indigenous people and the poor; people have 
more limited incentives to invest labor and capital to improve soil, plant perennial crops, manage 
rangelands, and invest in irrigation. When land rights are secure, farmers invest more in their land and 
agricultural productivity improves. When land rights are insecure, investment, productivity, and yields 
fall55. 
55 https://www.land-links.org/what-is-land-tenure/ 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
41
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
Different land tenure systems have their advantages and disadvantages. Customary systems, very 
common in Somalia, which are often based on traditional, unwritten, and locally relevant rules about 
how to use and allocate land and resources, facilitate social cohesion, but they may not be able to 
withstand increasing pressure on land and resources both from within the community and from the 
outside (compared with statutory systems which provide written legal rules or written case law about 
these issues). Customary systems are often claimed to be compatible with pastoralist areas where 
extensive grazing land/pasture is utilsed by virtuous clans and groups. 
On the other hand, individual land ownership, which is important for smallholder farmers and large- 
scale commercials farms, may put land to the most economically efficient use, but it may exclude 
disadvantaged populations, such as the poor, and limit state land management options. Public (or 
state) land ownership may withhold land for conservation purposes or public land management and 
facilitate more equal access to prime locations, but it may lead to poor land use and land management 
outcomes as a result of bureaucratic inactivity and corruption. For inclusive and sustainable land 
governance, it is important that land systems are evaluated holistically, to understand how and why 
decisions on land and natural resources are made, implemented and enforced in both formal and 
informal settings. 
4.7.1. Policy Context: Currently the legal framework for Somalia’s land tenure system is a mix of 
secular, sharia, and customary xeer law. This legal pluralism has often provided a flexible structure 
that local actors have used to craft appropriate solutions, but it has also left grey areas within which 
conflicts begin. In order to reduce potential clashes and raise incentives to invest in the country’s 
largest economic sector – agriculture – Somalia needs greater transparency and certainty in its land 
tenure regime. In addition, the current system largely excludes women from control over property, 
impoverishing them and the society as a whole56. 
The 2012 Provisional Constitution of the Federal Republic of Somalia has recognized the need to 
formulate a national land policy to streamline land tenure issues along with the powers of Federal 
member states to develop their land policies to suite their peculiar situations. Article 43 of the 
Provisional Constitutions describes that: 
(1) Land is Somalia’s primary resource and the basis of the people’s livelihood. 
(2) Land shall be held, used and managed in an equitable, efficient, productive and sustainable. 
Section 3 of Article 43, specifies the key policy issues which the forthcoming national land policy 
would address with regard to ownership rights, dispute resolution and sustainable management of 
land resources; specifically, it describes the following: 
(3) The Federal Government shall develop a national land policy, which shall be subject to constant 
review. That policy shall ensure: 
(a) Equity in land allocation and the use of its resources; 
(b) The guarantee of land ownership and registration; 
(c) That land is utilised without causing harm to the land; 
(d) That any land and property dispute is resolved promptly and satisfactorily for all; 
(e) That the amount of land that a person or a company can own is specified; 
(f) That the land and property market is regulated in a manner that prevents violations of the rights 
of small land owners; and 
(g) That the Federal Member States may formulate land policies at their level. 
(4) No permit may be granted regarding the permanent use of any portion of the land, sea or air of the 
territory of the Federal Republic of Somalia. The Federal Parliament shall enact a law regulating the 
size, timeline and conditions of permits of land use. 
 
56 James Burman, et. Al, Land Tenure in Somalia: A potential foundation for security and prosperity 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
42
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
The Federal Government, in consultation with the Federal Member States and other stakeholders, 
shall regulate land policy, and land control and use measures. 
These policy provisions need to be vigorously pursued by the line ministries of food security role to 
ensure the policy promotes security of tenure for investing in land both by smallholder farmers (who 
apparently produce 80% of the country’s cereals crops) as well as large-scale commercial farms along 
irrigated areas. 
Due to its socio-economic significance both as a source of livelihoods for millions of nomadic & agro-
pastoralists as well as its leading roles in foreign currency earnings from international livestock trading, 
the land tenure security of pastoralists need to be given special consideration. To this end, the COMESA 
Policy Framework argues that, “in Ethiopia, for example, the 1992 constitution guarantees pastoralists’ 
rights to unclaimed land for grazing and cultivation, and the right not to be driven from their lands. 
Similarly, the Constitution of Kenya recognizes customary land rights (but not customary institutions) 
specifying these are to be held in trust by county councils for the be3nfit of communities in accordance 
with their customary practices and laws. Ensuring that such broad provisions are applied is also highly 
dependent on governments recognizing the full socio-economic value of pastoralism as a land use 
system57. 
The Federal national land policy and law need to take in to consideration the need to protect by law of 
pastoralists land rights as well as the institutions responsible for the management of land resources to 
ensure both the rights of pastoralists are protected as well as the country achieves the potential 
economic/trade benefits from the livestock sector. 
4.7.2. Policy Objective: to ensure the national land policy and land law recognize and protect 
smallholder farmers, large-scale commercial farmers, and nomadic pastoralists’ grazing rights. 
4.7.3. Policy Statement: the government will ensure that security of land tenure for all productive 
agricultural and livestock production is protected by law to enhance investments for increased 
production and productivity, contributing to achieving household and national food security. 
4.7.4. Policy Measures: in order to ensure security of tenure of smallholders, commercial farmers, 
and nomadic pastoralists; food security-related ministries and agencies will: 
i. 
Provide technical support to the concerned federal government institution in the formulation of the 
national Land policy and land act by explicitly stand for individual land rights of farmers as well as 
collective/community rights of pastoralists; 
ii. Ensure that the National Land Policy will contain clear provisions of tenure security for rights 
holders including female-headed households and pastoralists; 
iii. Advocate for the inclusion of customary institutions of natural resource governance for the 
enforcement of pastoral land rights; 
iv. Lobby for the rights of women to land 
4.8. Strategic Food Reserve 
Strategic food reserves provide a breathing space between the identification of the possibility of a 
national or a localised food shortage occurring and making the necessary arrangements for mitigating 
its impact, becoming a first line of defense for coping with food emergencies, which would normally be 
caused by drought, floods, storms, earthquakes, crop failures resulting from pests or disease as well 
as from man-made causes, such as war and civil strife58. 
57 Policy Framework for Food Security in Pastoralist Areas (Consultative Draft; Dec. 2009); COMESA/CADDAP, Pillar III 
58 Strategic grain reserves. Guidelines for their establishment, management and operation. (FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin - 126) 
(1997) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
43
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
The establishment and maintenance of Strategic Food Reserves stems from the events of the early 
1970s when a prolonged drought in the Sahel, resulted in a series of disastrous harvests throughout 
the region. The seriousness of the situation was compounded by a simultaneous world-wide cereal 
shortage which led to prices rising to record levels. With limited availability and high prices; the donor 
community was only able to provide limited amounts of food aid with the result that many people in 
the region experienced famine. The effects of these events were also felt in many other countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa which, because of scarcity and cost, had difficulty in making adequate provision 
for needed imports to supplement their own shortfalls in production. 
To  reduce the severity of such events in the future, governments in several vulnerable countries,     in 
consultation with the donor community, embarked on the development of programmes aimed at 
ensuring an adequate availability of food for affected populations and the development of national food 
security strategies. Emphasis was put on propositioning stocks of basic cereals in vulnerable Sahelian 
countries to be held in readiness for use in the event of future food emergencies59. 
These stocks were not intended to cope with the entire emergency, but rather to provide for the  basic 
needs of the affected population during the lead time required for arranging the availability of 
alternative supplies. Priority was generally given to ensuring an adequate availability for the urban 
population, i.e. market dependent population, as it was assumed that the rural population would have 
retained sufficient stocks, or otherwise made adequate provision for meeting its basic food needs, e.g. 
through the production of alternative drought resistant crops. Subsequently, it was realized that there 
were vulnerable groups amongst the rural population which should also be included when considering 
releases from the reserve. 
All countries in east and horn of Africa region (including the net food importer nation of Djibouti) have 
established and operated a national strategic food reserve with different reasons deemed appropriate 
to serve their national interest. The main purposes of the Strategic Food Reserve varies according  to 
countries: generally the purposes are either is to cushion farmers from the effect of over-supply   in 
periods of good weather (that is to purchase from farmers and hold in store when there is excess 
supply to markets); and/or to release food in the case of shortage (to provide a first line of defense for 
coping with food deficits) to households with little or no market access or where markets are not well 
functioning due to a number of reasons. 
While Strategic Reserves mostly maintain physical stocks of cereals, experience from different 
countries reveal that it is necessary to include diverse food types to ensure target beneficiaries food 
culture is satisfied as well as nutritionally important foods such as milk powder, pulses/legumes are 
readily available within the reserve. A recent experience in Ethiopia reveal that livestock feed was also 
part of the emergency Food Security Reserve distributed to pastoralists. Reserves are provided with 
cash (by government and donors) to purchase the initial amount of grains (or food and fodder) 
determined by the appropriate government agency. Additional cash is also reserved to maintain the 
stock, usually an amount equivalent to the physical stock to maintain the reserve. 
4.8.1. Policy context: Since Somalia has been largely dependent on commercial food imports and 
humanitarian food assistance; there is a need to consider a strategic food reserve program to ensure 
uninterrupted food supply to the most vulnerable in cases of global food price shocks as well as 
accidental price hikes by the private sector who import such foods. Economic and logistical feasibility 
should also be considered with the view to including livestock feed to become a component of the 
Strategic Food Reserves as livestock are affected by frequent droughts. 
Strategic Food Reserve can also protect farmers from selling their produce at cheaper prices 
immediately after harvest as markets will be supplied with greater quantities than are required in short 
periods of time. The Strategic food reserve, which maintains cash as well will be able to purchase 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
44
=== PAGE 56 ===
59 Ibid
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
grains from surplus producing areas not well connected to major markets so that increased production 
does not become disincentive due to lack of markets for the producers 
Even though Institutional framework varies from country to country, Strategic Food Reserves are 
managed by an independent Board (the members of which are drawn from major stakeholder 
government agencies) under a high-level government institution/Ministry. Depending on several 
factors, donors provide technical and financial support for the technical and operational review and 
management of Strategic Reserves. 
4.8.2. Policy Objective: to maintain stable supply of food to acutely food insecure population 
4.8.3. Policy Statement: the government, in collaboration with development partners, subject to 
feasibility studies, shall establish and manage SFR to support ongoing food security programs of 
government and humanitarian aid targeting acutely food insecure population while safeguarding 
farmers from low process due to oversupply. 
4.8.4. Policy measures: In order to establish and manage SFR, the government in collaboration with 
donors, partners, and the private sector will: 
i. 
Commission comprehensive feasibility and comparative studies detailing the requirements of     a 
Strategic Food Reserve, including but not limited to, agricultural statistics, crop production 
forecast, market information system, size of the reserve, composition (physical stock and cash 
requirement, including the possibility of livestock feed, etc). Experiences from the neighboring 
countries and expert opinion and lessons learned from specialized agencies such as FAO, WFP, 
and IFPRI will have to be considered by the study. If the study recommends the establishment of 
SFR, the following measures will be taken; 
ii. 
Based on the study, determine institutional Framework under which the SFR will operate, including 
the linkages with Federal Member State administrations; 
iii. Determine the location of SFRs based on cost effectiveness but also convenience and availability of 
facilities (eg, close to production areas or consumption areas or areas with adequate infrastructures 
and technology if both production and consumption areas are not feasible); 
iv. Develop management structures and functions of the various units/departments of the SFR; 
v. Identify and assign qualified managerial , technical, and support staff for the various units; 
vi. Identify initial operational budgetary requirements both from the Federal government and donors. 
Strategic Food Reserves usually are expensive due to fixed costs such as the construction of well- 
equipped warehouses at different locations, purchase of food from domestic markets as well as 
international procurements, handling and distribution. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
45
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
Section 5: Policies on Cross-cutting Issues 
In order to align food security sector cross-cutting issues with the NDP 9 (National Development Plan 
2020-2024); the following cross-cutting issues are identified and brief policy statements are defined. 
5.1. Building Resilience to multiple shocks 
5.1.1. Policy context: Somalia has been exposed to multiple shocks, hazards and disasters in the past 
decades and remain vulnerable for climate change effects (drought and floods), Insecurity (due   to 
sporadic armed conflict), global market price volatility (due to its dependence on commercial food 
imports); and migratory pests and trans-boundary animal diseases. 
In order to mitigate the impact of these multiple shocks to food security and livelihoods, the government 
in collaboration with development partners and humanitarian community has developed a number       of 
mechanisms and instruments under the relevant ministries and commissions. Key among these 
instruments are the RRF (based on DINA) under the MOPIED, IDDRSI (under the MOLFR); and NDP 9 
Pillar 3: Economic Development. 
The RRF has identified the agriculture recovery needs to the tune of 243,512,237 USD for a total of   91 
projects covering crop production, livestock and fisheries, of which 39 are high priority, 25 medium 
priorities and 27 low priorities 
The IGAD Drought Disaster Resilience Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI) Strategy recognizes the need for 
a comprehensive and holistic approach to combating chronic food and nutrition insecurity and addresses 
the deep-seated poverty and environmental degradation to build the resilience of communities and 
households to the effects of droughts and other shocks in the region. The Strategy identifies 7 priority 
intervention areas, where the necessary investment and action will help build resilience through reducing 
the vulnerability of target communities to climatic and economic shocks. 
These priority intervention areas include ensuring equitable access and sustainable use of natural 
resources, while improving environmental management; enhancing market access, facilitating trade and 
availing versatile financial services; providing equitable access to livelihood support and basic social 
services; improving disaster risk management capabilities and preparedness for effective response; 
enhancing the generation and use of research, knowledge, technology and innovations in the IGAD 
region; promoting conflict prevention and resolution and peace building; strengthening coordination 
mechanisms and institutional arrangements for more organized, collaborative and synergistic action   as 
well as improving partnerships to increase the commitment and support necessary to execute the 
objectives of the initiative. In the refined CPP, Human Capital, Gender and Social Development pillar is 
added to strengthen the social dimensions of the CPP. 
NDP – 9; Pillar 3: Economic Development states that resilience of the agriculture sector will be developed 
through irrigation and better water management, land management, environmental protection, improved 
agricultural technology and extension. Building resilience, reducing poverty and transitioning from aid 
dependency are key tenets for Somalia’s national development. It also asserts that building resilience to 
those shocks at the national and household levels is critical for reducing vulnerability over the medium 
term. 
5.1.2. Policy Objective: the food security sector shall ensure that individuals, households and 
communities are supported to become resilient before, during, and after multiple shocks 
5.1.3. Policy Statement: the government will ensure that vulnerable households and communities are 
targeted to benefit from support provided by the various instruments to develop resilience so that they are 
no longer displaced from their home villages/communities and remain engaged in productive activities. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
46
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
5.1.4. Policy measures: The line ministries of food security sector will: 
i. 
Align policy measures of the food security policy with the interventions identified under the various 
instruments and facilities (of RRF, IDDRSI, and NDP 9) 
ii. 
Ensure that interventions identified under those instruments are implemented a as planned or 
monitor changes to the plans if conditions have changed during implementation; 
iii. 
Identify additional measures as necessary 
5.2. Gender Issues in Food Security 
Gender could be seen as a source of vulnerability because of gender bias in employment and wages 
reflected in substantial differences at the level of income earned and the concentration of females in 
low-skilled and low-status job. Female-headed households represent a typical group of the vulnerable 
segments of the poor that are food insecure. They exhibit low farm production and income largely 
because they lack manpower and have fewer assets than an average poor household. 
Gender relations play an important role in food security and nutrition management in the community. 
Women contribute substantial amount of labour to produce most of the food but they have no control 
over food resources. At the same time, they are expected to ensure their own nutritional wellbeing  as 
well as that of the family including food distribution within the family members. On the other hand, 
whereas studies have been conducted on the nutritional needs of women, little has been done on the 
needs of men and the elderly men. 
5.2.1. Policy context: The gender dimension of food security is critical in Somalia as women 
contribute greatly to economic development. In addition to women’s reproductive role, women also 
have a substantive productive role in the rural sector, including participation in livestock management, 
crop production, and the marketing of rural produce. Building on the constitutionally granted democratic, 
economic and social rights of women, the proposed National Gender Policy is expected to create an 
enabling environment for the empowerment of women through integration of gender perspectives in 
the design and implementation of economic and social policies, programs and projects in general and 
food security in particular. Somalia needs gender disaggregated data within the food security sector to 
ensure evidence-based planning and balanced allocation of resources when designing employment 
generating enterprises and projects. 
5.2.2. Policy Objective: to ensure gender balance in all food security plans, projects, and enterprise 
developments so that vulnerable women, in particular have equal access to economic resources for 
improved food security and nutrition. 
5.2.3. Policy Statement: the government will ensure that food security strategies, plans and programs 
are designed and formulated taking in to consideration the roles, needs and rights of women, like those 
of men, for improving their food security. 
5.2.4. Policy Measures: in order to ensure gender equity in food security; the government will: 
i. 
Provide guidelines that data on employment and job creation opportunities should be gender- 
disaggregated, and all interventions will include a gender analysis, and targets and indicators 
that are appropriately gendered” in line with NDP 9 social development and cross-cutting 
imperatives 
ii. 
Promote gender-sensitive technologies and programmes including in value addition 
iii. 
Support the private sector that are able to target and prioritize vulnerable women entrepreneurs 
iv. 
Promote micro-finance institutions geared towards supporting women’s access to finance 
v. 
Support nutrition-sensitive programs to address reproductive related challenges including child 
feeding in the event that mothers are unable to breast feed children, 
vi. 
Promote equitable access to land; 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
47
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
vii. 
Explore and implement labour-saving technologies and related services and infrastructure to 
free up women’s time for economic activities and improve their quality of life; 
viii. Mechanisms to improve access to clean water; introduce/expand fuel-efficient cooking 
methods, etc to reduce the workload of women in collection of water, fuel wood, etc. 
ix. 
Support individual or group of women to establish/manage kitchen gardens, small-scale poultry, 
dairy and other income generating activities with the aim of economic empowerment of women 
and nutrition improvement within the household. 
5.3. Food Security Data and Information management 
5.3.1. Policy context: Food security planning, programming, and decision making must be made 
based on evidence; and such evidence should be developed from empirical data and information. 
Currently food security data is being collected, stored and analysed through development partners 
such as FAO, WFP, FEWS NET, etc. The government line ministries appear to be passive recipient of 
data and information. This can be partly explained due to the lack of the required infrastructure, 
expertise, technologies, and management capacity. However, as the country is gradually heading to 
peace and improved security, pre-requisites for long term development, the need to establish food 
security information management becomes even more important. 
The MOAI should also take the lead to come up with the requirements and technical, specifications of the 
information management (infrastructure/hardware/software, technology/equipment) human resource, 
and other fixed and recurrent costs to run and manage the system. The technical specifications and 
management requirements can be worked out with FAO or other partners. 
5.3.2. Policy Objective: to establish a food security database and information management system 
to ensure that planning, programming and decisions are made on the basis of evidence. 
5.3.3. Policy Statement: the government will establish a food security data base and information 
management system at the most appropriate federal government institution while extending similar 
structures with limited scope at State and District levels. 
5.3.4. Policy Measures: The federal government with support from its international partners currently 
working on Food Security and Nutrition information management will take the following measures: 
i. 
Develop a concept note, describing the rationale of the information management system and 
its functions; its expected outputs and outcomes; and the responsible government institution/ 
department, including the link with National Statistics agency/office. Key information systems 
which should be included in the concept note include food and non-food market price information, 
crop, livestock, and fisheries production information, agro-meteorology information, grazing and 
pasture information, etc) 
ii. Secure the legality of the institution through inter-ministerial decrees or other means 
iii. Analyse current capacities for database and information management 
iv. Design a manageable system, structure and function 
v. Develop institutional, technical (technological) and human resource capacities running/managing 
the system 
vi. Lobby for technical and administrative support for capacity development and implementation of 
the system 
vii. Ensure data and information quality control 
viii. Periodic review of the impact of the system; 
ix. Risk analysis using the available data and information to determine how often specified events 
(Drought, floods, etc) might occur and the magnitude of their consequences. This can be used to 
determine risk management priorities, interventions and budgets. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
48
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
5.4. Capacity Development 
5.4.1. Policy context: One of the legacies of the long civil war in Somalia is that many experienced 
and highly trained Somalis left the country to build lives elsewhere. Many of these migrants were those 
individuals who could have been expected to take responsibility for ensuring that effective action is taken 
within the framework of this Food Security and Nutrition Policy. As a result, institutional, human 
resource and technical capacity required to plan, implement, monitor and report recovery and 
development programs is far from being adequate. For example, agricultural research and extension 
will have to start from scratch; the capacity to formulate and enforce food safety, standards, and quality 
control regulations is far from being adequate in the face of international standards, 
Capacity gaps are even more pronounced at the State and district levels. Therefore, the government 
needs to design a capacity development program right from the Federal up to the District level of food 
security-related line ministries. The capacity assessment should build on earlier capacity assessment 
reports such as the “Assessment of the Functional Structure of the Federal and State Ministries of 
Agriculture and Irrigation”, a report produced by Outreach Program. FAO has a Capacity Development 
Framework (CDF) to assess capacity needs and come up with recommendations for action. The FAO 
CDF has been effectively used in South Sudan and the Republic of Sudan in 2013 with high degree 
of success in articulating capacity needs and gaps and the actions needed to address those gaps. 
There will also be a need for a comprehensive capacity development work to establish and manage 
the “Food Security Commission” envisaged under NDP-9. It will require physical, institutional and 
technical capacity development to effectively coordinate and manage its diverse functions. 
5.4.2. Policy Objective: to develop the capacities of institutions, its personnel and physical 
infrastructure for efficient and sustainable management of food security and related sectors. 
5.4.3. Policy Statement: the government in collaboration with development partners will ensure 
adequate human resource, institutional and physical capacities are developed in the short to medium 
term to manage food security institutions and programs. 
5.4.4. Policy measures: The Government will: 
i. 
Prepare capacity assessment plan. The plan shall include specific issues such as the physical 
capacity needs of Federal-level line ministries, State-level Ministries, District-level offices; human 
resource capacity at all levels, technical/technological capacity at all levels, etc. The plan shall be 
jointly agreed and endorsed by the sector ministries and Member State ministries; 
ii. The cost of conducting capacity needs assessment such as allowances, transport, logistics, 
and reporting costs (including presentation, validation and dissemination of findings) should be 
developed and sources identified; 
iii. Once the capacity assessment is concluded with recommendations for action and the estimated 
costs of addressing gaps identified during the assessment, a donor conference shall be organised 
to secure funding for the implementation of findings or capacity development action plans. This will 
facilitate transparency and accountability as well as to measure impacts. 
5.5. Climate Change 
5.5.1. 
Policy context: The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
defines climate change as “a change in climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability 
observed over comparable periods of time”60 
60 Article 1; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC, 1992) 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
49
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
Climate Change poses severe threat to farmers and pastoralists communities in Somalia by reducing their 
access to food, pasture, and water. Climate change has significant impacts on all four key dimensions of 
food security: food availability, food access, food utilization, and stability of food supply, access and 
utilization. Availability of agricultural products is affected by climate change directly through its impact on 
crop yields, crop pests and diseases, water-holding properties, and soil fertility. In addition, stability of 
crop yields and food supplies is negatively affected by variable weather conditions. Physical, economic, 
and social access to food is affected negatively by climate change as agricultural production declines, 
food prices rise, and purchasing power decreases. Climate change also poses threats to food utilization 
through its effects on human health and the spread of diseases even in geographical areas which were 
previously not affected. Recurrent droughts and floods of increasing frequency, which are the result of 
climate change, directly affect food production, health, livelihoods, assets and infrastructure thereby 
contributing to increases in poverty during these times and beyond. 
The drought of 2010/11 and the floods of 2017 and 2020 are the direct effects of climate change. The other 
impact such as environmental degradation, loss of productive capacity and reduced household welfare 
can be larger and longer lasting. The combination of prevailing high food insecurity due to droughts, 
conflicts, floods, shortage of river water and ongoing high deforestation, environmental degradation, loss 
of productive capacity and reduced household welfare will leave Somalia vulnerable to climate change. 
During the last 10 years, there have been recurrent droughts and widely spread malnutrition that resulted 
in the loss of millions of animal due to the lack of pasture and water resulting in complete collapse of the 
livelihood system of the pastoralist.  Studies reveal that Climate Change will reduce food productivity  by 
affecting all four dimensions of food security namely food availability, access to food, stability of food 
supplies, and food utilization. 
The Somali Federal Government did not give sufficient attention and support to climate change despite 
the urgent needs of Somali agricultural systems to adapt to climate change to ensure food security and 
development needs of the growing populations. The traditional reaction to drought and its effect has been 
to adopt a crisis management approach through the provision of relief or emergency assistance to the 
affected areas or sectors. The result is that drought only receives the attention of the humanitarian 
organizations when it is at peak levels of intensity and spatial extent and when management options are 
quite limited. 
5.5.2. Policy Objective: to guide the productive sector implement climate sensitive production and 
environmental management practices to reduce climate change effects for sustainable food security. 
5.5.3. Policy Statement: the government will promote and invest in mitigating climate change effects to 
maintain long-term adaptation and sustainable food security. 
5.5.4. Policy measures: in order to address the challenges posed by climate change to Food Security 
and Nutrition in a sustainable manner; the government will: 
5.5.4.1. Optimize the use of existing drought monitoring and early warning systems to improve drought 
impact management under current and future climate conditions 
i. 
Generate a baseline of “normal” conditions from ground observations and remotely sensed climate 
data sets against which to classify drought; 
ii. 
Review current disaster response strategies, and governance and policies in place for drought 
management. Compare these to international best practices, particularly in the areas of water and 
food security, highlighting how existing data could be used more effectively; 
iii. 
Build the capacity of federal and member state staff on the effective use of drought monitoring and 
early warning systems, disaster resilience leadership, response planning and risk management; 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
50
=== PAGE 63 ===
 
iv. 
Organize forums for exchange of knowledge and learning on resilience, drought monitoring and 
early warning systems. These forums will take place at the district, regional and national level with 
the participation communities, community leaders, government officials, INGOs/NGOs, 
academics and donors; 
v. 
Systematize the use of drought preparedness, prevention and mitigation measures to cushion the 
negative impacts of droughts on development dynamics. 
5.5.4.2. Identifying areas vulnerable to climate change 
i. 
Generate national-level climate change data and maps (at 15 km scale) to indicate areas likely to 
be affected by changes in temperature, precipitation and evapotranspiration, floods through 
dynamic downscaling from global climate models (200-150km scale) 
ii. 
Characterize future droughts from downscaled climate change data so differences relative to 
today’s conditions are understood 
iii. 
Promote rainwater harvesting to ensure water is available for irrigation and livestock use during 
dry period. 
iv. Adopt a risk management approach which is anticipatory and preventive and not reactive. 
v. 
Identify agricultural areas most vulnerable to climate change according to the information produced 
though downscaling and modelling 
vi. Explore and quantify impacts of future droughts on water systems and crop production in the 
identified vulnerable areas to support strategy development and planning for climate change 
adaptation. 
vii. Build the capacity of Ministries of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries, and Ministry of Livestock 
(Federal and State Level) and target communities in the use of climate change and early warning 
information effectively to maintain and increase production and productivity. 
viii. Train local academic institution in applying appropriate tools (including appropriate gender and 
disability tools) to research climate change data, modelling and its impact on community resilience. 
5.5.4.3. Develop climate-smart agriculture and water technology packages 
i. Assess available natural resources (soil and water) in the vulnerable agricultural areas and 
determine alternative water resources (brackish groundwater, storm water harvesting, etc.) to 
stabilize affected communities; 
i. Direct resources on preparedness for drought and floods through a variety of capacity building 
programs that can enhance awareness and capabilities at all levels; 
i. 
Emphasize on strategies aimed at enabling local communities to effectively adapt to climate 
change and reduce impact on Food Security and Nutrition. 
i. 
Formulate robust climate-smart agricultural policies and strategies to create enabling policy 
environment and investment plans to adopt, use and scale CSA technologies at national, regional, 
or local levels using participatory and inclusive approaches 
i. 
Establish and rehabilitate national demonstration farms in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture 
comprising low-input systems and introduce integrated crops-forages-livestock farming packages, 
including: 
i. 
Open field agriculture: cultivation of heat/drought/salt-tolerant varieties of bread and durum wheat, 
barley, chickpea, lentil, faba bean, grass pea, etc. 
i. Vegetables grown in shade houses to maximize productivity and profitability. 
i. Forages (alfalfa and other salt-tolerant forages, e.g. Sporobolus, Distichlis, Paspalum, etc.), noting 
that correct variety selection, planting technique and timing, and grazing management are crucial 
for sustained productivity; 
i. Determine water requirements and appropriate irrigation schedules for selected crops. Introduce 
the deficit irrigation concept for drought areas and water-saving irrigation practices that increase 
water use efficiency and address soil and water salinity issues, while maintaining or increasing 
crop yields under current and future climate scenarios; 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
51
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
i. Conduct Land Degradation Surveillance Framework to assess multiple indicators for effective 
understanding of social, ecological, and biophysical constraints affecting landscape management, 
land rehabilitation and recovery, and guide the interventions for wider climate change adoption 
and scaling; 
i. Improve soil fertility by introducing appropriate farm management practices, including rotation of 
cereal-legume systems; 
i. Establish and/or strengthen existing community-based seed production units/enterprises to produce 
seeds of heat/drought/salt-tolerant crops and forages. 
5.5.4.4. Develop the capacity of Somali farmers in targeted areas to adopt and use climate-smart 
agricultural technologies 
i. 
Plan and conduct formative rapid assessment to collect and analyze data on existing capacities, 
gaps and interventions related to climate-smart technologies adoption and usage for drought 
resilience interventions; 
ii. 
Organize farmer field schools in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture and irrigation to 
demonstrate climate-smart agricultural technologies to farmers in targeted areas and train the 
latter in their appropriate application; 
iii. Design and deliver relevant training courses to staff of the Ministry of the Agriculture and Irrigation, 
including extension workers, to facilitate the transfer of developed technology packages to farmers 
in targeted areas; 
iv. Conduct Training of Trainers (ToT) to enable wide dissemination of developed technology 
packages within targeted areas and other vulnerable regions of Somalia; 
v. 
Introduce where possible mobile phone applications for crop and weather monitoring systems to 
control irrigation needs; 
vi. Develop community-level guidelines to facilitate gender inclusive wide scale adaptation of climate- 
smart agricultural technologies; 
vii. Promote farmer-to-farmer and community-wide peer learning using social networks, performance 
incentives and rewards; 
viii.  Build networks for longer-term development through identification of key knowledge networks and 
communities of practice at the regional and international level to increase access of government 
and other national partners to learning and knowledge exchange on best practice on drought 
disaster resilience and climate-smart agricultural technologies. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
52
=== PAGE 65 ===
 
Section 6: Policy Implementation 
6.1. Formulation of Implementation arrangements 
This National Food Security Policy will be implemented through a Food Security Strategic Plan or Action 
Plan that will be developed through a consultative and participatory process with all stakeholders, 
whose role in planning and implementation of policy measures are critically important. It is important 
that formulation of the Strategic Plan or Action Plan should immediately follow the endorsement of this 
Policy so that the needs and priorities identified are addressed in timely manner to achieving Food 
Security and Nutrition of the suffering Somalis. The Policy measures identified and articulated in this 
Policy shall form the basis for the formulation of the National Food Security and Nutrition Strategic Plan 
or Action Plan. 
6.2. 
Institutional Framework 
The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and irrigation has been responsible for coordinating and spearheading 
the formulation and implementation of the National food security Policy as demonstrated during the 2018 
Food Security and Agriculture Sector Development Conference. The Goal and Objectives of the National 
food security Policy shall be achieved through the active participation of various stakeholders including 
other government institution, the private sector, and development partners. This policy recognizes 
different sectoral and sub-sectoral policies, strategies, and National Plans and the institutions managing 
them such as the National Development Plan 9 (2020-2024); Recovery and Resilience Framework, 
National Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy, Livestock Sector Development Strategy, the Agriculture 
Sector Development Strategy, National fertilizer Policy, National Irrigation Policy and other policies, 
strategies and plans/programs as they are important in achieving policy objectives. 
The Ministries of Agriculture and irrigation, ministry of Livestock, Range and Forest, Ministry of Fisheries 
and Marine Resources, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, 
are the lead ministries in food security policy. Their mandate is to support, promote and guide the 
production of crops, livestock and fish so as to ensure the improved quality and quantity of agricultural 
produce and products for domestic consumption, nutrition, food security and exports. The specific 
mandate of the MOH is to improve the quality of health services and nutrition with the overall goal of 
reducing morbidity and mortality. The production ministries and MOH are also promoting diet 
diversification as well as other food-based strategies for a healthy and productive population. 
The other Federal Government stakeholders engaged in food security includes Ministry of Health and 
Human Services, Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, Ministry of Planning, 
Investment and Economic Development (MOPIED), Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher 
Education, Ministry of Trade and Industries, Chamber of Commerce. Other key Government Institutions 
include Federal Member State Ministries of Agriculture, Ministry of livestock, and Ministry of Fisheries. 
NDP-9 (2020-2024) has recommended the establishment of a national (inter-ministerial) Commission 
responsible for the coordination of the food security agenda across government. This is in line with the 
recommendations made by the Global Strategic Framework for Food Security which states that61: 
a. States should set up or strengthen inter-ministerial mechanisms responsible for national food 
security and nutrition strategies, policies and programmes; 
b. Those mechanisms should ideally be formed and coordinated at a high level of government, 
consolidated in national law, and involve representatives from ministries or national agencies from 
all areas related to food security and nutrition, including agriculture, social protection, development, 
health, infrastructure, education, finance, industry, and technology. 
61 Committee on World Food Security, Global Strategic Framework Food Security and Nutrition (GSF); 2017 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
53
=== PAGE 66 ===
 
The MOAI should take the lead in developing key milestones for the implementation of this national 
policy until the Federal Government through its “Food and Nutrition Committee” of the Somali Federal 
Parliament establishes the “Commission 
The MOAI shall develop a Concept Note or Memorandum to establish temporary organizational 
structure and functions, involving the above key ministries and Member State Ministries; elaborate the 
Terms of Reference including a work plan from submission of the draft national food security policy for 
endorsement to the implementation phase. 
The consortium of national ministries and ministries from Member States will need to agree in developing 
institutional responsibly for each of the Policy Measures described under the Policy Document. A 
national Food Security Strategic Plan or Action Plan will have to be developed for turning those Policy 
Measures into Strategic Objectives and actions. 
6.3. Legal Framework 
The MOAI should quickly move forward and make follow ups for the establishment and legal status of 
the “Food Security Commission” envisaged under NDP – 9. The legal status of the Commission will 
enable it to lobby for a percentage of national budget allocated to implement its core functions; 
hopefully in line with the 2003 Maputo Declaration of 10% of the annual GDP. It will also present 
opportunities to engage with development partners for technical and financial support and selected 
priority agendas of the Food Security Sector. 
6.4. Financing and Resource mobilisation 
Financing and resource mobilization of the National Food Security Policy will need to be arranged in two 
phases. The first phase is the policy dissemination and awareness creation among key stakeholders; 
while the second phase will be implementation of the Policy itself through a National Food Security 
Strategic Plan or Plan of Action. 
The first phase involves the dissemination of the draft policy document to key stakeholders including 
member State governments, through electronic and print media for consensus building. Depending on 
the mode of dissemination, and the associated cost, mechanisms should be arranged to cover such 
costs. These costs should include all activities until the Policy is endorsed by the country’s highest 
government organs. It is recommended that the MOAI and partners should be aware of the cost 
implication of dissemination mechanisms which require financial resources and these resources need 
to be identified and a description of “possible sources” need to be provided as much as possible and 
reflected in the policy document “financing section” 
The second phase, which follows the official endorsement of the Policy, will require the formulation of 
National Food Security Strategic Plan (NFSSP) and Action Plan (NFSSAP) on the basis of the policy 
measures identified under section 3, 4, and 5 of this policy document. The MOAI will need to take the 
lead among key food security stakeholders (including member States) to formulate the Strategic Plan 
and Action Plan which will spell out institutional responsibilities among the key actors (government, 
private sector, development partners) for the implementation of the Policy Measures. 
In order to secure financial resources needed to formulate and implement the Strategic Plan and/    or 
Action Plan; there is a need to develop a resource mobilization plan which will clearly quantify resource 
requirements and sources of resources. Formation of a technical committee, with clear terms of 
reference, composed of Directors or DGs from the most important stakeholders would be an ideal 
starting point (including Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, among others) 
for resource mobilization. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy
 
 
 
54
=== PAGE 67 ===
 
6.5. Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting Framework 
6.5.1. Monitoring of policy implementation 
A monitoring and Evaluation Framework shall be developed to ensure the policy is implemented. 
Implementation of the key Policy provisions, mainly the Policy Measures will be through a National 
Food Security Strategic Plan and Action Plan 
The proposed policy measures and institutional arrangements as well as priority investments to achieve 
the national food security goal and objectives will be prioritized and sequenced in line with NDP 9, 
RRF, Livestock Strategy, Disaster Risk Management Policy, Agriculture Sector Development, National 
Fertilizer Policy, National Irrigation Policy and other national and sector policies and strategies Sound 
socio-economic and technical criterion that take into account gender and environmental concerns will 
be used in setting priorities. 
Implementation of the proposed policy measures will build on the existing institutions, mechanisms, 
structures and human resources, while seeking to improve their capacities for greater effectiveness 
and efficiency as appropriate. The design and implementation of policy and institutional reforms and 
investment projects/programs to implement the various elements of the Policy will be discussed with 
development partners with a view to seeking technical and financial cooperation. The Federal Member 
States’ administrations will play an important role in addressing, managing, and analyzing information 
related to household food insecurity and their capacity will be strengthened. 
At a later stage, when the Food Security Strategic Plan or Action Plan is prepared, cost estimates will 
be reflected in the budget of the respective implementing ministries and member State administrations. 
Provisional cost estimates to implement the Strategic Plan or Action Plan during the coming 5- years 
(or as may be agreed but preferably aligned with NDP 9 and other sector strategies for measuring 
impacts) including the financial gap will be prepared at a later date, to coincide with the budget 
preparation process and the National Short and Medium Term Development Plan. 
The Government will present to the donor community the proposed priority projects and requests for 
assistance to provide funding and technical assistance towards implementation of the Policy, and by 
extension the Strategic Plan or Action Plan. The Strategic Plan costing will serve as an instrument  to 
track food security related expenditures but also monitor key intermediate success drivers (or 
catalysts) and outcomes. In the meantime, the key steps in monitoring policy implementation involve: 
1. Preparation and submission of a Concept note detailing institutional framework with Terms of 
Reference of the “Food Security Commission” to the concerned authority 
2. Launching institutional and legal framework once approved by the relevant government authority 
3. Formulation of either a National Food Security/Nutrition Strategic Plan with implementation matrix, 
or a National Program for Food Security/Action Plan 
4. Detailed monitoring and evaluation framework for the Strategic Plan or Action Plan and key 
performance indicators. 
6.5.2. Evaluation: Evaluation of the Policy goal and Objectives will be made once the Strategic Plan 
and Action Plans are developed. Depending on the agreed time frame for the Strategic Plan, a mid- 
term and final evaluation will be worked out with corresponding budget to ensure the evaluation is 
carried out as planned. 
6.5.3. Reporting: Reporting requirements, frequency, and content will be agreed up on developing the 
monitoring and evaluation framework. 
 
Somalia National Food Security Policy 
 
 
 
55
=== PAGE 68 ===

