=== PAGE 1 ===
September 2024
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: 
Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL (NEC) of SOMALIA
SEPTEMBER 2024
=== PAGE 2 ===
NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL (NEC) of SOMALIA
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: 
Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
By:
Abdul-Aziz Iddrisu
Senior Economist, World Bank’s Chief Economist of Government (CEoG) Fellowship;
African Center for Economic Transformation, Ghana,
&
National Economic Council (NEC), Somalia.
September 2024
=== PAGE 3 ===
Contents
Foreword ................................................................................................................................................iv
Acknowledgement ...................................................................................................................................v
Executive Summary................................................................................................................................vi
1. Introduction........................................................................................................................................ 1
2. The State of Affairs............................................................................................................................. 2
2.1 The ports/marine sector .............................................................................................................................................. 2
2.2 	 The Fisheries sector................................................................................................................................................... 4
2.3 	 Oil and gas.................................................................................................................................................................... 4
2.4 	 Wind energy................................................................................................................................................................. 5
3.	
Turning the Tide and Picking up Lessons from Other Countries....................................................... 6
3.1 	 The ports/marine sector........................................................................................................................................... 6
3.2 	 The Fisheries sector................................................................................................................................................... 9
3.3 	 Oil and gas sector....................................................................................................................................................... 9
3.4 	 Wind energy................................................................................................................................................................. 9
4.	
The Cost Implications, Financing, and the Projected Revenues..................................................... 10
4.1 	 Costs...........................................................................................................................................................................10
4.2 	 Financing the face lift of the ports/marine sector, the road networks and the fisheries sector..............13
4.3 	 Projected Revenues from the blue economy......................................................................................................14
5. The risk issues.................................................................................................................................. 15
6. Conclusion........................................................................................................................................ 15
About National Economic Council ......................................................................................................... 17
Endnotes............................................................................................................................................... 18
=== PAGE 4 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
iv
September 2024
Foreword 
With the longest coastline in mainland Africa, Somalia is not only strategically located but has enormous 
blue economy potential. The enormity of the resource endowments and the advantages of the strategic 
location have not counted all these years. The potential to connect Africa to the rest of the world and 
become a logistics hub; the renewable energy potential from the tidal waves and wind; the fibre optic 
capability; the endowment of fish and the potential for value additions along the chain; the potential 
for resorts and recreational facilities to boost tourism; and the numerous ocean resources available to 
Somalia remain substantially untapped. Making these advantages count for Somalia is crucial as the 
country looks to build a robust and prosperous economy for all Somalis.
Hassan Adam Hosow  
Chief Economic Advisor to the President of Somalia 
Executive Director, National Economic Council
=== PAGE 5 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
v
Acknowledgement 
This paper received inputs from Mohamed Abdurrahman Mohamed who is the Director of Presidential 
Initiatives and Flagship Programs Department & the Centennial Vision 2060 Coordinator at 
National Economic Council of Somalia. The paper was thoroughly reviewed by Hassan Hosow, the 
Executive Director of the National Economic Council (NEC) and the Economic Advisor to the President 
of Somalia.
=== PAGE 6 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
vi
September 2024
Executive Summary
Somalia has the longest coastline in mainland Africa, covering 3,333 km and strategically positioned 
along major shipping routes such as the Sue Canal, Gulf of Aden, the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea 
where about 80 percent of the international maritime trade is channelled. Such a strategic location 
makes Somalia the natural trade route for other countries (particularly its neighbors) for inland transits 
and transhipments. The length and the strategic location of the coastline, as well as the abundance 
of blue economy resources are crucial for the transformation of the Somali economy, provided these 
resources are harnessed. Somalia has not been able to make these resources and locational advantage 
count, as infrastructure and policies required to harness these resources have been lacking. As Somalia 
looks to transform its economy through a long-term development blueprint, the blue economy potential 
is one of the priority areas for consideration. This policy paper therefore explores the strategic coastal 
position of Somalia and proposes measures to develop it into a continental logistics hub. By leveraging 
its geographic advantage, Somalia can enhance regional connectivity, boost trade volumes, attract 
investment, and stimulate economic growth. The paper also outlines how Somalia could leverage its 
coast to develop other sectors such as fisheries, oil & gas, and wind energy. The paper outlines key 
policy recommendations to establish the necessary infrastructure, facilitate trade, promote private 
sector engagement, and ensure sustainable development. It emphasizes the importance of collaboration 
among government entities, private sector stakeholders, and international partners to unlock Somalia’s 
potential along its coast.
=== PAGE 7 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
1
1. Introduction
Somalia’s coastline stretches 3,333 kilometres, 
making it the longest in Africa and with great 
potential to establish one of the largest blue 
economies in Africa and beyond. With the longest 
coastline in Africa, Somalia has the potential to 
establish itself as the major logistic hub in the 
world. Beyond the length, Somalia’s coastline is 
strategically positioned along major shipping routes 
such as the Sues Canal, Gulf of Aden, the Indian 
Ocean and the Red Sea where about 80 percent 
of the international maritime trade is channelled. 
Such a strategic location makes Somalia the natural 
trade route for other countries (particularly its 
neighbors) for inland transits and transhipments. 
This presents the country with the opportunity 
to harness port operations and position it as one 
of the most vibrant logistic hubs in the world. 
Another opportunity is the importation of goods 
into Somalia and then packaged for re-export to 
countries closer to Somalia such as Kenya and 
Ethiopia. The country has four key operational ports 
at Mogadishu, Berbera, Bosaaso, and Kismayo, of 
which three (Mogadishu, Kismayo and Berbera) 
are deep water1. 
Somalia can also leverage the sea to develop 
capacity in telecom and digital infrastructure by 
laying submarine cables to help provide world 
class connectivity locally and abroad. With the 
gift of the longest coastal, Somalia can exploit 
capabilities in fibre optic technology (through 
submarine cables) and become one of the major 
global players in the distribution of international 
bandwidth and fast internet connectivity, particularly 
to the neighboring landlocked Ethiopia. Somalia’s 
export is largely dominated by livestock, implying 
substantial concentration risk. Meanwhile, the 
country has the opportunity for export diversification 
by exploiting the fisheries potentials with its longest 
coastline. The fisheries sector would also provide 
the added nutrition apart from meat.  Somalia’s 
coastline could help with renewable energy and 
power, given that the country is currently battling 
expensive, inefficient, and unreliable supply of 
power. There is the potential for wind energy in 
Somalia, given the offshore wind which is at 8 
metres per second (the continent’s highest). The 
country’s longest coastline also allows the tourism 
sector to develop through recreational facilities 
and resorts along the coast. This would help 
contribute significantly to the diversification of 
the Somali economy from the current reliance on 
agriculture and create jobs for the youth. There is 
also the potential for oil and gas exploration from 
the country’s coastline. However, establishing a 
vibrant blue economy and turning Somalia into 
a logistics hub requires enormous investment in 
hard and soft infrastructure, capacity building, 
governance, and regulatory reforms. 
The objective of this policy paper is to provide a 
comprehensive account of how Somalia can harness 
the potential of its blue economy. Specifically, the 
policy paper aims to provide the current situation 
of sectors of the blue economy potentials such as 
the ports, fisheries, wind energy, and oil and gas. 
Given the sparse information on the various blue 
economy sectors such as tourism, oil and gas, 
renewable energy (wind power), and fibre optic 
capabilities, this policy paper is heavy on ports 
and to some extent fisheries, oil & gas, and wind 
energy. Section 2 considers the current situation 
of the various blue economy sectors, especially the 
nature of infrastructure required. Section 3 looks 
at the ways of turning the tides and picking up 
lessons from other countries. Section 4 evaluates 
the cost of turning the corner, the financing sources 
and mechanisms, and the projected revenues from 
the blue economy sectors. Section 5 looks at the 
possible risk factors and section 6 concludes.  
1
Introduction
=== PAGE 8 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
2
September 2024
2. The State of Affairs
2.1 The ports/marine sector 
In spite of the length of Somalia’s coastline, there 
are only 3 deep water ports in the country, partly 
because the country’s coast lacks adequate roads 
connecting the ports to inlands for the purposes of 
carting cargos from the ports to their destinations 
inland. Around just 13 percent of all roads in 
Somalia (2,860km out of 21,830km) have been 
paved and even the paved roads are in bad shape, 
exacerbated by poor maintenance culture, climate 
change, and the protracted conflict.  In addition to 
the few operational and deep-water ports, the traffic 
volumes are skewed to Mogadishu and Berbera 
ports, with relative inactivity in the rest. The port at 
Mogadishu is estimated to handle about 949,506 
tons annually whiles Berbera handles 711,864 tons 
annually. Meanwhile, Kismayo, which is another 
deep-water port, handles just 4,556 tons.  Worse 
still, there is substantial excess capacities at 
Berbera and Mogadishu ports in spite of the fact 
that these ports handle most of the volumes in 
Somalia. For instance, whereas the berth days 
available at the country’s ports is 4,380, only about 
872 berth days are required for the current level 
of traffic volumes, representing 19.91 percent or 
approximately 20 percent. At Mogadishu port, 
for instance, the estimated capacity is 2 million 
tons per annum but only about 949,506 tons are 
currently handled2. 
The level of development and infrastructure at 
the country’s ports are very low. The Mogadishu 
port, which is the country’s most active port, 
suffers from inadequate equipment. The port 
has no breakwater, thereby hindering operations 
during the wet season. The lack of equipment has 
meant that vessels rely on their own cranes for the 
purpose of unloading cargos. At Bosaaso port in 
Puntland, there is only one berth which can only 
take one ship at any point in time. The situations 
2 The State of Affairs
at Kismayo and Berbera are not different. The poor 
infrastructure at the country’s ports, especially 
the Berbera port, has come at a cost to Somalia. 
For instance, on the country’s western border is 
Ethiopia, which is landlocked, and provides an 
enormous opportunity for Somalia to serve as the 
route for trade to and from Ethiopia. Sadly, around 
90 percent of Ethiopia’s import and export volumes 
are channelled through the ports of Djibouti, with 
Somalia attracting a paltry 10 percent (related 
to the export of livestock) through Berbera due 
to the poor infrastructure at Somalia’s ports. 
Available estimates indicate that Ethiopia pays 
to Djibouti, on daily basis, 2 million USD for the 
transit of goods through the latter3. Although the 
poor infrastructure narrative is changing with Al 
Bayrak and DP World taking over the operations 
of Mogadishu and Berbera ports respectively, the 
substantial infrastructure deficit remains a major 
challenge. 
Another challenge with Somalia’s ports is the issue 
of connectivity. Beyond the strategic location lies 
the need to work on the connectivity and integration 
of the country’s ports with the rest of the world. 
Somalia’s score on UNCTAD’s Liner Shipping 
Connectivity Index was just 9.8 as at the end of 
second quarter of 20234 indicating the very low level 
of integration of Somalia into global liner shipping 
networks. A county's accessibility to international 
markets and the nature of traffic volumes it attracts 
hinges to a greater extent on the connectivity of 
its transport, particularly relating to shipments 
of goods in export and import transactions. The 
performance is even worse at the port level as 
Berbera, Kismayo, and Mogadishu ports scored 
7.2, 6.8, and 7.9 respectively on UNCTAD’s Port 
Liner Shipping Connectivity Index at the end of 
the second quarter of 2023. For Bosaaso port, the 
most recent data is for the first quarter of 2022 
where the port scored 2.6 on UNCTAD’s Port Liner
=== PAGE 9 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
3
Shipping Connectivity Index and had been so since 
the first quarter of 2021.5 
Moreover, the operational performance of Somali 
ports is weak. The deficiency in institutional capacity 
across all the custom administrations in Somalia 
affects policymaking and operational performance. 
The ports continue to be characterized by slow 
handling and processing. At Berbera port for instance, 
the recorded hourly container moves are 6 relative 
to the standard 25 recorded at modern and efficient 
ports. The poor operational performance is also 
attributable to a lack of inadequate equipment at the 
country’s ports and the fact that the government is 
involved in the management of some of the ports, 
with the baggage of a myriad of unionised and 
overstaffed workforce who are less efficient. For 
instance, whereas modern ports are mostly capital-
intensive and technology-driven, Somalia’s ports 
are heavily over staffed, with about 5,000 workers 
at Mogadishu alone and another 2,000 at Berbera. 
The lack of jobs in the country is the major reason 
for the overstaffing at the ports.  Furthermore, as 
the Somali government rakes in most of its revenue 
from international trade (in the form of taxes, fees 
and custom duties), there has been reliance on 
revenues from the ports, thereby exerting upward 
pressure on port charges in Somalia6. 
Unsurprisingly, Somalia’s Logistics Performance 
Index (LPI)7 score in 2023 is 2, placing it at the 
137th position out of the 139 countries surveyed 
globally according to the World Bank data. In the 
2023 rankings, Somalia is ahead of only Afghanistan 
and Libya. The country’s LPI score of 2 in 2023 
represents a decline from 2.21 in 2018 when it 
ranked 144th out of the 160 countries surveyed in 
that year. Somalia’s LPI score has been unstable 
since 2014 when it scored 1.77 and ranked 160th 
country (the bottom) out of the 160 countries 
surveyed. There was a decline in the country’s 
score in 2016, registering a score of 1.75 and 
ranking 158th out of the 160 countries surveyed. 
The year 2018 saw a rebound to 2.21 in the LPI 
score (ranking 144th country out of 160 countries) 
but declined to 2 in 2023. 
The LPI score is a composite of other indicators 
such as customs score, infrastructure score, 
international shipment score, logistics competence 
score, tracking & tracing score, and timeliness 
score. The performance of Somalia in the scores 
and rankings of these subcomponents is telling. 
Table 1 summarizes the performance of Somalia 
in these subcomponents:
Table 1: Somali’s performance on subcomponents of LPI
 
2023
2018
2016
Score
Rank
Score
Rank
Score
Rank
Customs score
1.5
139th out of 139 
countries
2
145th out of 160 
countries
1.29
159th out of 160 
countries
Infrastructure 
score
1.9
132nd out of 139 
countries
1.81
157th out of 160 
countries
1.57
156th out of 160 
countries
International 
shipment score
2.4
111th out of 139 
countries
2.61
100th out of 160 
countries
1.86
157th out of 160 
countries
Logistics 
competence score
1.8
139th out of 139 
countries
2.3
121st out of 160 
countries
1.85
156th out of 160 
countries
Tracking and 
Tracing score
1.8
136th out of 139 
countries
2.23
140th out of 160 
countries
1.51
160th out of 160 
countries
Timeliness score
2.3
133rd out of 139 
countries
2.2
157th out of 160 
countries
2.35
152nd out of 160 
countries
Note: The customs score captures the efficiency of the processes for clearance at a country’s border control institutions and customs. It 
looks at how fast, predictable, and simple the processes and formalities for clearance are. The infrastructure score captures the quality of 
infrastructure related to transport and trade. Essentially, the score looks at infrastructure on information technology, roads, railroads, and 
ports. The international shipment score captures the extent of ease of making shipments which are also competitively priced. The logistics 
competence score captures the quality and competence of logistics services provided by institutions and entities such as customs brokers and 
transport operators. The tracking and tracing score measures the capacity to trace and track consignments. The timeliness score measures 
how quick shipments get to their destinations as scheduled.
=== PAGE 10 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
4
September 2024
Similarly, the container shipping indicators as of the 
second quarter of 2022 shows the following: the 
number of services provided at the Somali ports 
is 9; there are no alliances; the number of partner 
countries (indicating maritime connectivity) is 14; 
and the average (mean) turnaround time at the ports 
was 1.2 days. This compares unfavourably with 
Djibouti, one of Somalia’s competitors in terms of 
exports and imports of landlocked Ethiopia. Djibouti 
ports provide 13 services as against 9 in Somalia; 
Djibouti has 1 alliance whereas Somalia has none; 
Djibouti has 24 partner countries (measuring 
maritime connectivity) whereas Somalia has 14; 
and the mean turnaround time at Djibouti ports 
is 0.8 days compared to 1.2 days in Somalia. 
Unsurprisingly, Djibouti bags 90 percent of Ethiopia’s 
trade volumes. 
Clearly, a lot must be done to turn Somalia’s ports 
into global logistics hub. The level of development 
and infrastructure certainly reflect in these rankings 
and dent the attractiveness of Somali ports to the 
rest of the world. 
2.2 	 The Fisheries sector
The potential of Somalia’s fisheries sector is 
enormous, considering the endowment of fish 
species such as tuna, sharks, billfishes, anchovies, 
rays, seabream, mackerel, emperors, and a host 
of other species across an area of about 830,390 
km2 within Somalia’s Economic Exclusion Zone8. 
Additionally, fishing in Somalia can be done offshore 
and onshore, with substantial potential in both 
streams. The annual potential contribution of the 
sector is projected to range between USD 350 
million and USD 950 million9. This potential, however, 
remains unrealised as the sector is substantially 
under-developed. The lack of cold-chains, landing 
sites, jetties, and infrastructure for processing of 
fishes largely hinder the growth of the fisheries 
sector. There is also the problem of post-harvest 
losses. The poor infrastructure and the lack of 
access to local and foreign markets inhibit the 
growth of the sector and the attractiveness of the 
sector to private investors10. 
Moreover, what is holding back the potential of 
the fisheries sector include poor governance and 
regulatory frameworks; poor coordination between 
fisheries ministries at the FGS and FMS levels; 
and poor surveillance. The lack of a robust legal 
framework for the fisheries sector has meant 
that foreign-owned vessels continue to engage 
in widespread illegal fishing which endangers the 
sustainability of the country’s marine resources and 
destroying the marine ecosystem and environment. 
These vessels, involved in illegal fishing, also engage 
in abuse of labour, smuggling, and trafficking11. 
The illegal fishing is estimated to be in excess of 
USD 300 million12. Somalia also benefits little from 
the activities of numerous industrial vessels in the 
country’s marine space. In addition to the little 
benefits from the activities of both the industrial 
and foreign-owned vessels engaged in illegal 
fishing, the country’s future economic prospects 
is in jeopardy, given the massive depletion of 
its marine resources. Meanwhile, these natural 
resources are key to the economic renaissance 
and job creation. The country’s effort to reclaim 
and manage these resources as well as stem the 
tide of depletion is inhibited by the poor common 
governance framework coordination between the 
FMS and the FGS. There is lack of capacity to 
regulate and monitor the illegal fishing along the 
coast and the offshore area13. 
2.3 	 Oil and gas
Somalia’s endowment includes oil and gas which 
have largely not been tapped. The country is 
estimated to have about 206 oil blocks covering 
an area of 173,000 kilometres and with oil reserves 
equivalent to about 110 billion barrels, making the 
country the sixth in terms of oil reserve endowment 
in the world14. In 2022, Coastline Exploration (a 
US-based firm) reached an agreement with the 
FGS for the exploration of 7 offshore blocks over 
an area of 35,000km2, which saw the former 
pay the latter USD 7 million for the 7 blocks. 
From the 7 offshore blocks alone, the company 
is expecting to drill out barrels of oil running into 
tens of billions. Other exploration companies such 
as Shell and ExxonMobil are contemplating an 
entry into Somalia’s promising oil sector15. The 
burgeoning oil sector in Somalia provides enormous 
opportunities for the country’s economy and its
=== PAGE 11 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
5
citizens. The country needs to ensure greater 
participation of local content (local businesses 
and citizens in the value chain) in the sector. There 
needs also to be proper mechanisms to ensure 
that Somalia benefits significantly from its oil. 
2.4 	 Wind energy
The private sector is at the heart of power generation 
and supply, following the collapse of central 
government in 1991. The sector generates a little 
above 100 megawatts, fraught with inefficiencies 
as it depends on the use of diesel generators to 
generate power. As a result, power generation in 
the country is beset with technical and commercial 
losses, estimated to be around 35 percent of power 
generated. In addition to technical and commercial 
losses, the sector also suffers transmission losses 
of up to 40 percent. The inefficiencies are borne 
by consumers, as electricity cost is estimated 
to range between USD 0.6 and USD 1 for every 
kilowatt relative to Horn of Africa’s average which 
is estimated to be USD 0.2 for every kilowatt. 
Meanwhile, this is a country endowed with offshore 
wind in excess of 8 meters per second and potential 
capacity ranging between 30,000 megawatts and 
45,000 megawatts which puts Somalia amongst 
Africa’s highest in terms of speed of tidal waves 
and therefore a potential for wind energy to power 
industrialisation and economic renaissance.
=== PAGE 12 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
6
September 2024
3.	
Turning the Tide and Picking up Lessons from 
Other Countries
3.1 	 The ports/marine sector
Somalia’s longest coastline and the proximity to 
markets in the GCC countries, Asia and the Middle 
East is not a guarantee that the country would 
be the preferred trade route for neighbouring 
countries and Africa at large. The fact that the 
country attracts only 10 percent of Ethiopia’s trade 
volumes, the operations below capacities at the 
various ports, the relative inactivity at some of the 
ports, and the apparent poor performance on LPI 
and other connectivity indices are clear evidence 
of the fact that the potential that the coastline and 
its strategic proximity to global markets present, 
require concerted efforts to actualize them. This 
section presents the necessary steps Somalia would 
need to take to turn the tide of underperformance 
and the lack of exploitation of the full potential of 
the country’s maritime ecosystem. 
3.1.1 	 The need to construct new ports
Given the length of Somalia’s coastline, the fact 
that the country has only four operational ports, 
of which three are deep water, is underwhelming. 
There is a need to situate deep water and active 
ports along the coast. The reconstruction of a port 
at Garacad is underway to add to the active and 
operational ports in Somalia. The reconstruction 
project, which is in three phases, is estimated 
to cost USD 180 million upon completion and is 
funded exclusively by the country’s private sector. 
The first phase, estimated at a cost of USD 40 
million, has been completed. The Garacad port, 
when completed, would be capable of handling 
about 3.5 million tons annually and can concurrently 
take about 4 cargo ships of up to 30,000 DWT. The 
location of the port is strategic, as its distance to 
the border with Ethiopia is within 303 kilometers. 
The reconstruction of this port should help lower 
land transport cost across parts of central Somalia. 
The port would also provide connectivity advantage 
to Ethiopia via Galkayo and Galdogob. However, 
the government would have to construct a road 
from Garacad to Galkayo and Galdogob. 
3.1.2 	 The need to construct new roads and 
improve existing roads linking the ports 
and inlands
One of the factors for which Somali ports have not 
attracted the needed traffic volumes is the lack 
of roads (paved and unpaved) linking the major 
ports to inlands. At the moment, the country’s 
main port at Mogadishu links up with the inland 
through the 1,400km road from Mogadishu to 
Berbera. There is another 520km road that connects 
Mogadishu and Dolo through Baidoa. The Bosaaso 
port connects to the inland through the north-south 
major highway which starts from Mogadishu and 
links through Garowe and Galkayo16. Not only are 
these roads not enough but given the potential of 
the Mogadishu port in particular, the greater portions 
of these roads are in a bad state. Establishing 
a world class logistics hub in Somalia requires 
first class roads (fixing the existing roads and 
constructing new ones) from the ports to many 
parts of Somalia to enable transit through the 
country to neighbouring countries. It also allows 
goods to be shipped to Somalia for packaging and 
onward distribution to various States in Somalia 
and neighbouring countries. Such avenues then 
open up the warehousing businesses and related 
value chain along the coast. 
3.1.3 	 Working on infrastructure and development
To actualize the potential of Somalia as logistics 
hub, significant investment in infrastructure (hard 
and soft) at the country’s ports is required. As 
3
Turning the Tide and Picking up 
Lessons from Other Countries
=== PAGE 13 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
7
development levels at the country’s ports is currently 
low, the traffic volumes at the ports are equally on the 
low side. There is the need to invest in infrastructure 
such as cranes, breakwater, warehousing facilities, 
weigh bridges, office equipment, inspection yards, 
barge berths, multi-purpose berths (particularly at 
Barawe), improvement in Mogadishu terminal’s oil 
facilities, construction of meat processing factories 
at the ports (especially Berbera and Bosaaso ports), 
workshops, general cargo, reefer yard areas, empty 
container handlers, reach stackers, offices for 
staff, and a host of other modern infrastructure. 
The country also needs to improve on the ICT 
infrastructure at the ports. In addition to reducing 
clearing times and the associated transaction 
costs, improvement in ICT infrastructure is also 
crucial in facilitating uniform and consistent 
application of customs procedures and laws on 
goods. The digitalisation of the processes also 
ensures transparency in revenue collections and 
improvement in revenue. 
Investment in infrastructure must be systematic 
and over time. Singapore developed into one 
of the world’s renowned logistics hubs through 
phenomenal levels of investments in top-notched 
infrastructure and processes over time. In spite of 
the levels of investments already made, Singapore 
is currently building the ‘Next Generation Port 
2030’, which, when completed, would make the 
Singapore port the world’s biggest integrated port, 
as it is billed to handle about 65 million containers. 
The country is also considering the technology of 
deploying automated guided cars without drivers 
and are determined to ride on smart sensors for 
the detection of irregularities in shipping such as 
piracy and the prediction of traffic-prone spots 
using data analytics. In 1989, Singapore unveiled 
a national single window, the first in the world, 
which rationalised and digitized processes for 
the approval of trade permits with the view to 
ease and simplify trade. The window had most 
government institutions in Singapore aboard, with 
a paradigm shift to trade facilitation from trade 
control. The window has made it possible for the 
electronic processing of permit approvals in a 
matter of minutes. The country is also working 
to augment the window to allow for integration 
of several business-to-business dealings onto the 
single digital platform17.
Apart from the story of Singapore, Somalia’s 
neighbour Ethiopia has established itself as one 
of the greatest aviation hubs in Africa, thanks to 
substantial investments in infrastructure. The 
Ethiopian Airlines, in addition to the enormous 
investment already made to achieve the current 
status is investing USD 5 billion to develop the 
Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa, as the 
airport is currently struggling to cope with the 
increasing traffic. The rise in traffic volumes has 
been phenomenal, reaching 7 million passengers 
in 2014 from less than 1 million passengers in 
less than a decade prior18. The International Air 
Transport Association (IATA) projects that the 
air transport sector in Ethiopia will have traffic 
volumes of 23.5 million passengers, contribute 
USD 13.5 billion to GDP, and create about 2 million 
jobs by 2037 according to the current trends. 
They also forecast that even in a worst case 
scenario, the passenger traffic will be 20.1 billion 
people, contribute USD 11.6 billion to the GDP, 
and create 1.7 million jobs by 2037. In the best 
case scenario, the traffic volumes could be 25.9 
million passengers, contribute USD 14.9 billion 
to GDP, and create 2.2 million jobs in Ethiopia by 
203719. Ethiopian Airlines is also establishing a 
new terminal at Bole International Airport with the 
state of the art infrastructure. The new terminal 
boasts of e-gate facilities, 10 self-bag drops, 30 
self-check-in kiosks, 16 immigration counters, 60 
check-in counters, 3 and 10 contact and remote 
contact gates respectively20. 
Such levels of investments in infrastructure are sure 
to the way to keep developing and establishing the 
East African country as a colossus in the world’s 
aviation space. It provides sufficient motivation for 
Somalia to invest in the required infrastructure to 
develop its ports into global maritime giants. That 
is possible, given Somalia’s proximity to markets in 
Asia, the Gulf region, and the Middle East. Indeed, 
Ethiopia exploited a similar proximity advantage by 
establishing a strong aviation sector that connects 
Africa to Asia, the Middle East, the Gulf countries, 
and parts of Europe and the Americas.
=== PAGE 14 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
8
September 2024
3.1.4 	 Dealing with connectivity
For a vibrant logistics hub, connectivity is crucial. 
At the moment, the Berbera Addis Ababa corridor 
is the gateway to Somalia’s connectivity to the 
rest of Africa. The north of Somalia links to Sudan 
through Addis Ababa whiles the south of Somalia 
links to Mombasa through Addis Ababa. There is 
also 1,450km corridor to link Ethiopia’s eastern part 
to the trade corridors with Berbera. Another route 
is the link from Somalia to Kenya. This corridor is 
from Kismayo port to Liboi which shares border 
with Kenya. This route is estimated to be 750km 
long but the part from Kismayo to Liboi (up to the 
border with Kenya) is 220km long. The focus, in 
terms of development should therefore be on the 
220km portion of the corridor up to the border with 
Kenya. The Mogadishu – Beled Hawo – Nairobi 
route is also estimated to be 1,490km long. However, 
the part that falls within the territories of Somalia 
is 530km road from Mogadishu through Baidoa 
to Dollow and Beled Hawo21. 
There is the need to develop these corridors, 
particularly the portions which fall within the 
territories of Somalia, to facilitate trade through 
Somalia. The country can also explore the possibility 
of becoming the transit point for trade to and from 
Uganda and Kenya by looking at the Kismayo to 
Kampala and Nairobi route. Naturally, the connecting 
route from Somalia to other African countries may 
be cost prohibitive, given the distance by land. 
However, the greater benefit or trump card for 
Somalia is that it is much closer to ports in Asia 
and the Middle East. Removing multiple and illegal 
checkpoints on the roads, working on processing 
times at customs checkpoints, and the logistics 
fees would make Somalia a very attractive route 
for trade. As Somalia is part of trade blocs such 
as the Common Market for Eastern and Southern 
Africa (COMESA) and the East African Community 
(EAC), developing greater connectivity with member 
states of these trade blocs is crucial to enable the 
country capture substantial trade volumes within 
these trade blocs and beyond. 
The experiences of Singapore, Panama, and 
Ethiopia are crucial for Somalia. By virtue of its 
size, Singapore naturally has relatively small 
domestic market. However, the building of a web 
of connectivity with the rest of the world has 
turned Singapore into one of the preferred logistics 
hubs in the world. To boost connectivity in the 
aviation space to build synergies with the ports, 
the country secured 130 Air Services Agreement 
with different countries. Similar connectivity web 
was created in the maritime space as the country 
engaged a number of shipping lines to establish 
one of the busiest maritime transport system. 
To engender greater accessibility to other global 
markets, Singapore secured over 30 Free Trade 
Agreements with other countries. This impressive 
levels of connectivity endeared Singapore to many 
companies in the maritime and logistics business 
to locate their operation in Singapore to benefit 
from the established connectivity and the added 
advantage of getting their consignments delivered 
on time22. The game changer for Panama has 
been the extensive connectivity to a number of 
countries. Panama is connected to 1,700 ports and 
144 maritime routes. The country has established 
Free Trade Zones, with over 3,000 companies that 
enjoy tax waiver on imports and exports. There is 
also warehousing facilities at the port and transit 
time is not even up to an hour23. Ethiopia exploited 
their proximity to Asia, Middle East, and Europe 
and developed their aviation sector as a route 
to link Africa to these continents. The airline has 
also developed the capacity to connect Africa to 
the Americas. 
3.1.5	
Working on operational performance and 
efficiency of processes at the ports
Deficiency in institutional capacity across all 
the customs administrations in Somalia affects 
policymaking and operational performance. This 
calls for capacity building efforts for the various 
levels of staff across the custom administration. 
There is a need to establish modernised 
authorities at the various ports in Somalia. The 
fact that most of Somalia’s borders do not have 
customs administration due to lack of resources, 
infrastructure and qualified personnel makes illicit 
trade thrive. With modernised and efficient customs 
administration at each border, transparency and 
accountability are enhanced in revenue collection 
and promote efficiency in customs procedures
=== PAGE 15 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
9
which go a long way to lower transaction costs for 
players in international trade and make Somalia a 
competitive and attractive route. 
The current laws relating to customs have not been 
updated in a long while. They need to improve in 
dealing with a myriad of customs-related matters, 
particularly on operations such as transit, duty 
drawbacks, warehousing, and refunds amongst 
others. Enacting regulations reflective of modern 
customs operations is crucial in ensuring efficiency 
and effectiveness at borders and not necessarily 
deterring the legitimate flow of trade volumes. 
Such regulations embrace good customs controls 
and the need to engender facilitation of trade24. 
The customs tariff regime is complex and would 
have to be revisited. There is a lack of clarity for 
traders in distinguishing between costs related 
purely to port services and those related to inland 
revenues. Moreover, Somalia uses a reference 
prices regime (with no bearing on the exact real 
value of goods) when the world has long embraced 
the concept of transactional value. The country, 
in some cases, specify fixed customs duties 
(irrespective of the value, features, and the quality 
of the goods) which implies certain goods could 
be substantially under levied and occasion loss of 
revenues. Custom duties should be informed by the 
features of the product, the value and the quality of 
the product. There is the need for harmonization of 
customs processes and regimes at all the ports in 
Somalia. This helps to have common tariffs duty 
rates across the ports. This helps to also do away 
with multiple taxation at the FGS and FMS levels25. 
3.2 	 The Fisheries sector
The potential of Somalia’s fisheries sector can be 
realised with the right investments in cold chains, 
landing sites, jetties, and other infrastructure for 
the processing of fish. The processing of fish adds 
value and creates another layer of job opportunities 
for Somalis. The processing facilities also help to 
cure the perennial post-harvest losses suffered by 
the players in the sector. 
There is a need to build the necessary legal 
frameworks, build strong institutions, enact fisheries 
law, and develop sharing frameworks for revenues 
between FGS and FMS. The improvement in 
governance structures would help deal with illegal 
and undocumented fishing which continues to 
plague the sector. In addition to the governance 
structures, there would be the need to invest in 
surveillance and monitoring to be able to root 
out illegal and undocumented fishing in Somalia. 
Importantly, Somalia would need to establish 
strong coordination between the FGS and the 
FMS not only on revenue-sharing mechanisms 
but also dealing with licensing issues for fishing 
vessels. This would go a long way to streamline 
operations in the sector. Streamlining operations and 
coordination also requires that some investments 
are made in human and institutional capacity 
building which is currently lacking. To motivate 
private sector involvement, there is the need to 
work on accessibility to domestic and external 
markets, particularly for landlocked countries. 
3.3 	 Oil and gas sector
This is an emerging sector and Somalia would 
have to put in place the regulatory framework to 
ensure the country is not exploited by oil exploration 
companies. The country would have to ensure 
maximum benefits from the exploration of its oil. 
The local content issue is very crucial to avert 
agitations by citizens. 
3.4 	 Wind energy
The use of diesel generators, along with the 
inefficiencies and costs, could make the power 
sector one of the nemesis of industrialisation and 
economic renaissance agenda. With endowment 
of tidal waves in excess of 8 meters per second, 
Somalia could turn the tide by investing in wind 
energy which could prove to be less expensive and 
more efficient. The private sector is already at the 
heart of the power sector and government would 
need to streamline the operations of these private 
companies and provide conducive environment.
=== PAGE 16 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
10
September 2024
4.	
The Cost Implications, Financing, and the 
Projected Revenues
4.1 	 Costs
Ports/Marine sector
In 2016, the African Development Bank (AfDB), in 
transport needs assessment on Somalia, provided 
estimates for a number of priority projects ranging 
from port construction, berth construction, road 
construction and rehabilitation, aviation sector 
projects, and a host of others. This section adapts 
some of these estimates by adjusting for inflation. 
Given that the estimates were given in United 
States dollars, the adjustment is done using the 
inflation rate in the United States. In 2016 when 
the AfDB provided the estimates, the inflation rate 
was 1.26 percent in the United States according 
to the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 
(WDI) database. With IMF projecting inflation to 
average 3.8 percent in the US in 2023, it is safe to 
adjust the estimates using the percentage increase 
between the inflation rate in 2023 and the rate in 
2016. Indeed, taking the average of the annual 
inflation rates between 2016 and the forecasted 
rate for 2023 yields about 3.2 percent (that is 1.26%, 
2.13%, 2.44%, 1.81%, 1.23%, 4.7%, 8% and 3.8% in 
2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022 and 
2023 respectively according to WDI data) which 
is not too far from the 3.8 percent that is used. 
4
The Cost Implications, Financing, 
and the Projected Revenues
From 1.26 percent in 2016 to 3.8 percent in 2023 
means prices have, on the average, tripled over 
the period. This warrants tripling of the estimates 
made by the AfDB in 2016 for the purposes of 
current estimates. 
Construction of additional port(s), berths, and 
related infrastructure
The construction of a port at Garacad in Puntland 
is underway. There is also the need for berths, 
information technology, and related infrastructure. 
The construction of a berth, estimated to cost 
around USD 20 million as of 2016 could now cost 
around USD 60 million. Constructing at least two 
new berths at several roadstead port sites (at least 
4) and at Barawe brings the total to 10 and the 
estimated cost to USD 600 million. The construction 
of a port at Garacad is estimated to cost USD 180 
million. The improvement in Mogadishu terminal’s 
oil import facilities and the investment in meat 
processing factories at Berbera and Bosaaso are 
estimated to cost about USD 60 million and USD 
180 million respectively. Meanwhile, the port charges 
harmonisation and the investment in information 
systems at the ports are estimated to cost USD 
1.5 million each. Table 2 below gives a summary 
of the estimated costs:
Turning the tide will not come cheap. Building additional ports, investing in world-class infrastructure 
(hard and soft), building institutional and human capacities, and enacting the regulatory framework 
would require substantial funding. However, that should not deter Somalia as the accompanying benefits 
of exploiting the potential of the country’s blue economy far outweigh the costs in a number of ways 
(contribution to GDP, job creation, poverty alleviation, diversification of the economy, and the integration 
of the Somali economy into the global market space). Importantly, the cost would not be incurred 
overnight. As countries such as Singapore and Ethiopia have demonstrated, such colossal investments 
are made over time. With the right planning and commitment, Somalia can turn around its economy's 
fortunes by exacting its coastline's potential. This section presents the estimated costs of investments 
in infrastructure, the financing plan and the projected revenues.
=== PAGE 17 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
11
Table 2: Cost estimates for port and related infrastructure as of 2023
Project
Cost elements
Costs (USD million)
Construction of a port at Garacad.
Construction and associated 
infrastructure and feasibility study
180
Construction of barge berths at 
about 4 roadstead port sites
Identification of preferred sites and 
technical and economic feasibility 
studies.
Construction of 4 berths
0.75 (feasibility studies)
240 (actual construction)
Construction of 2 multi-purpose 
berths at Barawe
Technical and economic feasibility 
study.
Construction
0.75
60
Upgrading of the oil import facilities 
at Mogadishu terminal.
Technical and economic feasibility 
study.
Upgrading of oil import facilities
0.75
 
60
Investment in port-based meat 
processing factories (at Berbera and 
Bosaaso)
Estimated costs of investment per 
meat processing plant.
Feasibility study
180
 
0.60
Harmonisation of the role of port 
charges as a source of revenues to 
government
Overhaul and harmonisation of port 
tariffs and ground rules for their use 
1.50
Port information system
Estimated costs of information 
system
1.50
TOTAL
725.85
Source: estimates adapted from AfDB’s transport sector needs assessment report
Construction and rehabilitation of roads to aid connectivity
To enhance connectivity with the rest of Africa and beyond, several major roads require fixing and new 
roads are needed in some instances. The estimated cost for the pavement and rehabilitation of paved 
roads for the purposes of enhancing connectivity is USD 2,739.36 million as presented in Table 3 below:
=== PAGE 18 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
12
September 2024
Table 3: Cost estimates for roads as of 2023
Road
Length (km)
Nature of project
Cost (USD 
million)
Mogadishu – Afgoye – Baidoa – 
Beled Hawo (Kenya border)
520
Requires pavement with Triple 
Surface Treatment (TST)
687
Mogadishu – Beledweyne – 
Galkayo 
704
Rehabilitation of paved road with 
TST
459.36
Kismayo – Merca – Mogadishu
483
Rehabilitation of paved road with 
TST
315
Kismayo – Liboi (Kenya border)
220
Requires pavement with TST
291
Bosaaso – Garowe 
410
Rehabilitation of paved road with 
TST
267
Galkayo – Garowe 
240
Rehabilitation of paved road with 
TST
156
Garowe – Lasanod 
130
Rehabilitation of paved road with 
TST
84
Galkayo – Garacad 
210
Requires pavement with TST
168
Galkayo – Galdogob 
60
Requires pavement with TST
48
Emergency maintenance
2,977 (total of 
above listed 
roads)
Filling of potholes/resurfacing to 
make the roads traffic worthy until 
the start of complete construction 
works
30
Routine maintenance upon 
stage-wise completion
2,977
Routine maintenance of all main 
roads after completion up to 10 
years
54
2,977
Detailed design and construction 
supervision of main roads
138
2,977
Establishment of Project 
Management Units
42
TOTAL
2,739.36
Source: estimates adapted from AfDB’s transport sector needs assessment report
The fisheries sector
There is sparse data to make any meaningful cost estimates and projections. The government's key 
focus in this sector is to develop strong regulatory frameworks, establish proper coordination with 
the FMS, devise equitable revenue sharing schemes, build human and institutional capacity, invest in 
infrastructure such as landing sites and jetties and improve monitoring and surveillance. These might 
not require the level of investments observed under the port/marine sector.
=== PAGE 19 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
13
4.2 	 Financing the face lift of the ports/
marine sector, the road networks and 
the fisheries sector
The ports/marine sector
The estimated cost of USD 725.85 million and USD 
2,739.36 million for the ports and roads sectors 
respectively look daunting, given Somalia’s finances 
and the nature of fiscal space it is working with. 
In particular, the fact that aid will fall off upon 
reaching HIPC Completion Point would make it 
even more onerous as the country would have 
to turn to concessional borrowing while avoiding 
debt accumulation. Luckily, the estimated costs are 
not entirely required in a year. With the necessary 
financial planning and support from the international 
community, Somalia can deliver a robust blue 
economy that would spur on economic renaissance. 
For these capital projects in particular, Somalia 
would have to engage multilateral institutions 
and donor agencies to support the financing of 
these projects. Budgetary allocation might not be 
feasible in the immediate term or perhaps over the 
next three years and therefore some engagements 
with multilateral organisations is crucial. 
In addition, Somalia would have to learn from 
the experience of Singapore by engaging the 
private sector to invest in the logistics sector and 
the entire blue economy sectors. Investment in 
Somalia’s ports in terms of infrastructure should 
be driven by the private sector, given the enormity 
of investment required vis-à-vis the country’s 
constrained fiscal space, and the concessional 
borrowing arrangements after the HIPC Completion 
Point. The exclusive financing of the Garacad 
port by the private sector is a bold statement 
of the capabilities of the Somali private sector 
which the government would have to harness. 
Additionally, the model involving Al Bayrak and 
the Ports Authority as well as the involvement of 
DP World at Berbera port should be encouraged 
and strengthened. The government can focus 
on building and strengthening institutions at 
the seaports and instituting the right regulatory 
frameworks and regimes while allowing the private 
sector to manage the operations of these ports. 
In Singapore, the government has worked at 
getting the buy-in of the private sector in terms of 
investment in the logistics sector. This has been 
achieved through government’s deliberate policies 
on making investment conducive in the country and 
making the business environment very attractive. 
As a result, Singapore is home to the regional 
and global operations of 20 of the world’s 25 
largest logistics companies. In addition to elevating 
Singapore’s status as a global logistics hub, the 
presence of these companies is a major boost for 
technology and best practices transfer to domestic 
companies in the logistics value chain. Several 
privately owned companies have also occasioned 
healthy competition and engendered efficiency in 
the sector. The government has also ensured close 
consultations with the private sector regarding 
the nature of infrastructure required by private 
companies to facilitate business transactions. This 
has ensured that businesses make inputs and are 
motivated to make investments in complementary 
infrastructure to supplement those made by the 
government. In addition to consultation, problems 
are equally addressed with the private sector26. 
Such a strong partnership with the private sector 
delivers business harmony and ensures long term 
commitment by the private sector for the mutual 
benefits of the state and the private sector. 
Somalia would have to put in place deliberate 
policies which make the logistics sector more 
attractive to the private sector. The private sector 
participation helps to uplift infrastructure and 
efficiency at the ports. Berbera port has been 
under the management of DP World since 2017. 
With the coming on board of DP World, cargo 
volumes are estimated to have increased by 
35 percent and another 300 percent increase 
in vessel productivity. The deployment of the 
digital systems and capacity building of staff by 
DP World has led to a reduction in vessel waiting 
times to hours from days. Upon taking over the 
operations, there has been expansion works. The 
first phase of the expansion saw an extension that 
can accommodate containers with 400 metre 
extra quay that can handle a maximum of 400 
metre LOA vessels measuring 8 metres high and
=== PAGE 20 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
14
September 2024
24 metres wide. The container terminal also has a 
capacity of 500,000 twenty-foot equivalent units. 
The expanded terminal now has a service centre 
providing one-stop services. The service centre is 
resourced with modern fibre optic network and the 
operation are fully computerized. The terminal has 
250 CCTV cameras installed with accompanying 
control room where the CCTV system is monitored 
from. The other capabilities include billing, cargo 
tracking, payment, finance, and maintenance. Prior 
to DP World taking over the operations, there were 
no cranes but now they have 6 cranes. There are 
also two warehouses, 6 empty container handlers, 
and 9 reach stackers27.
In December 2022, the government of Puntland 
and DP World reached an agreement to construct 
and upgrade the Bosaaso port. The construction 
project was billed to begin in 2023 and last for a 
period of 12 months. The project is expected to 
develop a new quay of 150 metres and renovate 
the existing quay which measures 215 metres. 
There will be a new container yard measuring 
3000 square metres, and a new container stripping 
yard measuring 4000 square metres28. Similarly, 
AI Bayrak is operating the Mogadishu port under 
a lease agreement over a 20-year period from 
September 2014. The presence of Al Bayrak has 
led to improvement in the quality of infrastructure, 
and capacity building for local staff. Such private 
sector involvements are key to taking some fiscal 
pressure off the books of the central government 
and must be explored. 
The fisheries sector
As indicated earlier, the nature of financing 
required for the fisheries sector is for regulatory 
and governance fortification. The role of private 
investors is crucial for this sector. The government 
must establish the conducive environment to 
attract the private sector.
4.3 	 Projected Revenues from the blue 
economy
Ports/Marine sector
The expected revenues from harnessing the 
country’s blue economy are enormous. For the 
ports and the logistics sector alone, the potential 
is phenomenal as the country’s domestic revenue 
sources are heavy on the international trade. By 
developing the ports and the logistics sector in 
particular, the contribution of revenues from trade 
would be phenomenal. On the back of poor roads, 
low levels of development of ports and lack of 
equipment at these ports, 90 percent of Ethiopia’s 
trade is routed through Djibouti, translating into 
USD 2 million revenues to Djibouti on daily basis 
as of 2016. Only 10 percent of Ethiopia’s trade 
was channelled through Somalia, implying that 
Somalia was receiving at least USD 222,222.2 
daily. By extension, the total daily revenues made 
by Djibouti and Somalia combined as of 2016 was 
USD 2,222,222.2 from Ethiopia’s trade. With tripling 
of prices, given the inflation rate, that comes to 
about USD 6.67 million when adjusted for inflation. 
With the right infrastructure and well-developed 
ports, Somalia can wrestle for a greater proportion 
of Ethiopia’s trade flows, especially because of its 
proximity to Ethiopia and markets in Asia, Gulf 
region and the Middle East. It is projected that 
Somalia could bag about 80 percent of Ethiopia’s 
trade, implying 80 percent of USD 6.67 million on 
daily basis (working out to about USD 5.34 million 
daily). On annual basis, Somalia could earn about 
USD 1,949.1 million from trade with Ethiopia alone 
and through just Berbera port.
Meanwhile, Berbera port handles less volumes 
compared to Mogadishu. At an estimated 2 
million tons across the 4 operational Somali 
ports, Mogadishu handles almost half (949,506 
tons) whiles Berbera port handles about 711,864 
tons. Goods imported through the Mogadishu 
port are largely cement and food whiles export 
is mostly livestock and fruit. Given the booming 
construction sector in Somalia, the Mogadishu 
port holds promise for increased import of cement 
for rebuilding Somalia. With relative inelastic 
demand for food, not only in Somalia but many 
parts of developing economies, an improvement 
in the Mogadishu port should see more imports of 
food by neighbouring countries through Somalia’s 
Mogadishu port. Livestock export remains Somalia’s 
major economic lever and aspects of it would 
continue to be channelled through Mogadishu. On
=== PAGE 21 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
15
the basis of the ratios of the volumes of traffic at 
Mogadishu and Berbera, an assumption is made 
that the revenues to be earned at Mogadishu port 
should be about 1.3 folds more than is projected to 
be earned at Berbera. This brings projected revenues 
at Mogadishu to USD 2,534.61 million annually. On 
the basis of this assumption, the traffic volumes 
at Berbera oil terminal and Kismayo port should 
bring in revenues of about USD 766.65 million 
and USD 12.48 million respectively every year. For 
Bosaaso, data is not readily available to facilitate 
projections. However, assuming the same traffic 
volumes as Kismayo, Bosaaso port is expected 
to rake in USD 12.48 million annually. In view of 
the fact that the Kenyan trade and trade from EAC 
and COMESA member states are expected to be 
targeted following the development of ports in 
Somalia, the assumption is to project about half 
of the current trade levels in the short to medium 
term. The revenue projections are presented in 
the Table 4 below:
Table 4: Revenue projections
Ports
Projected annual revenues 
from existing trade partners 
after the investments and 
face lift
(USD million)
Additional revenues from 
exploring trade with Kenya 
and other EAC and COMESA 
members
(USD million)
Combined revenues
(USD million)
Mogadishu
2,534.61
1,267.305
3,801.915
Berbera
1,949.1
974.55
2,923.65
Kismayo
12.48
6.24
18.72
Bosaaso
12.48
6.24
18.72
Berbera oil terminal
766.65
383.33
1,149.975
Garacad (new port)
-
400
400
TOTAL
5,275.32
3,037.66
8,312.98
The Fisheries sector
The sector is estimated to have the potential of 
contributing up to USD 950 million to the Somali 
economy if properly harnessed. 
5. The risk issues
The perceived and apparent security challenges in 
Somalia constitute a major risk to the exploitation 
of the potential of the country’s blue economy. In 
particular, the need to attract crucial private sector 
investment is heavily dependent on the security 
situation in Somalia.
The control and revenue-sharing modalities between 
the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the 
Federal Member States (FMS) is crucial for the 
success of the revamping of the blue economy.
The estimates of costs and revenues may not be 
realistic. Nevertheless, it provides a gap for more 
accurate estimates if the data becomes available. 
6. Conclusion
This policy paper provides a comprehensive 
roadmap for unlocking Somalia's potential as a 
continental logistics hub and in developing other 
blue economy sectors such as fisheries, oil & 
gas, and wind energy. It highlights the need for 
investment in infrastructure, trade facilitation, private 
sector engagement, skills development, regional 
cooperation, sustainability, and risk management. 
By implementing these recommendations, Somalia 
can harness its strategic coastal position to foster 
economic development and become a vital player 
in regional and international trade.
=== PAGE 22 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
16
September 2024
The various sectors of Somalia’s blue economy 
hold promise for economic recovery and buoyancy 
in the medium to long term. The job creation 
prospects, economic growth, and sustainable 
development potential are immense. Exploiting 
these potentials require concrete steps by the 
Somali government. These steps are contained 
in the following recommendations:
•	 The government should consider situating deep 
water ports along the coast. Given the length 
of the country’s coastline, having only 3 deep 
water ports is not enough to realise the potential 
of the country’s logistics sector. 
•	 The deplorable roads in Somalia requires fixing to 
aid connectivity of the country’s ports to inland 
and the rest of Africa and beyond. 
•	 There is the need to invest in infrastructure 
across the blue economy sectors such as ports, 
oil & gas, fisheries, and wind energy. 
•	 Capacity building programme for various levels 
of staff across the custom administration is 
recommended. There is also a need to establish 
modernised authorities at the various ports in 
Somalia. 
•	 The customs tariff regime requires review and 
harmonization as the current regime lacks 
clarity for traders in distinguishing between 
costs related purely to port services and those 
related to inland revenues.
•	 There is a need to build the necessary legal 
frameworks, build strong institutions, enact 
fisheries law, and develop sharing frameworks 
for revenues between FGS and FMS. The 
improvement in governance structures would 
help deal with illegal and undocumented fishing. 
In addition to the governance structures, there 
is also a need to invest in surveillance and 
monitoring to be able to root out illegal and 
undocumented fishing in Somalia. 
•	 To motivate private sector involvement, there is 
the need to work on accessibility to domestic 
and external markets, particularly for landlocked 
countries. 
•	 The oil and gas sector is an emerging one. The 
government would have to put in place the 
regulatory framework to ensure the country 
is not exploited by oil exploration companies. 
The country would have to ensure maximum 
benefits from the exploration of its oil. The local 
content issue is very crucial to avert agitations 
by citizens. 
•	 With endowment of tidal waves in excess of 
8 meters per second, Somalia should invest 
in wind energy to curtail the cost-prohibitive 
and inefficient power general and supply in the 
country.
•	 Somalia would have to court the participation 
of the private sector in unlocking the potential 
of the blue economy sectors. The enormity 
of investment required vis-à-vis the country’s 
constrained fiscal space, means private sector 
investment is crucial. This can happen with 
the right business environment created by the 
government.
•	 The need to attract crucial private sector 
investment is heavily dependent on the security 
situation in Somalia. The government should work 
at providing a safe environment for businesses 
to thrive.
•	 The control and revenue-sharing modalities 
between the Federal Government of Somalia 
(FGS) and the Federal Member States (FMS) 
is crucial for the success of the revamping of 
the blue economy.
=== PAGE 23 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
September 2024
17
About National Economic Council 
The National Economic Council (NEC) was established by the Federal Republic of Somalia in 2018 and 
restructured in November 2022 through a presidential decree. The NEC advisory arm is a vital component 
of the Office of the President and provides advisory services on economic and related policy matters.
The NEC is chaired by the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia (FRS), with the Prime Minister 
serving as deputy. Membership of the Council the economic sub-committee of the Cabinet of the FGS, 
the Governor of the Central Bank of Somalia, Federal Member States, and nine (9) National Economic 
Advisors (NEAs). The NEAs support the national leadership evidence-based research and advisory 
services on the nation's socioeconomic issues. The NEAs and other NEC staff form the technical arm 
of the NEC.
Since its establishment, the NEC has provided proactive policy recommendations that have shaped 
public debates on different policy options (scenarios). Its activities and publications have also played a 
significant role in fostering discussions on policy choices and have opened up areas previously limited 
to specific institutions. As a result, a community of professionals has emerged, engaging in discussions 
on policy issues and advocating for changes in their respective sectors.
=== PAGE 24 ===
Harnessing Somalia's Blue Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Prosperity
18
September 2024
Endnotes
1	
AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
2	
ibid
3	
ibid
4	
https://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId=92
5	
https://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx?ReportId=170026
6	
AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
7	
https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global
8	
Middlebrook, P., Tadaa, A., and Siad, H.M. (2022) Somalia blue economy assessment, 
taxonomy, and investment framework. National Economic Council of Somalia.
9	
ibid
10	 AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
11	 ibid
12	 Middlebrook, P., Tadaa, A., and Siad, H.M. (2022) Somalia blue economy assessment, 
taxonomy, and investment framework. National Economic Council of Somalia.
13	 AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
14	 ibid
15	 https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/market-insights/latest-news/
oil/050923-coastline-exploration-leads-new-charge-on-somalia-oil-and-gas
16	 AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
17	 https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/three-factors-have-made-singapore-global-logis-
tics-hub
18	 https://internationalfinance.com/how-did-ethiopian-airlines-make-it-happen/
19	 IATA (n.d.) The importance of air transport to Ethiopia.
20	 https://internationalfinance.com/how-did-ethiopian-airlines-make-it-happen/
21	 AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
22	 https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/three-factors-have-made-singapore-global-logis-
tics-hub
23	 https://propanama.gob.pa/en/post/6
24	 AfDB (2016) Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
25	 ibid
26	 https://blogs.worldbank.org/transport/three-factors-have-made-singapore-global-logis-
tics-hub
27	 https://www.dpworld.com/berbera
28	 https://www.dpworld.com/news/releases/dp-world-and-puntland-government-sign-con-
struction-agreement-to-upgrade-port-of-bosaso/
=== PAGE 25 ===

