=== PAGE 1 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOMALI NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
STRATEGY (SNIS) 
2019-2063 
 
 
 
 
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism 
 
 
 
October 2018
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Table of contents 
1. 
Background ........................................................................................................................................... 3 
2. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
3. Vision and overall objective for Somalia Infrastructure Development: ................................................... 5 
3.1 Overall Objective for the infrastructure sector in 2019 to 2023: ....................................................... 5 
3.2 Vision ................................................................................................................................................... 5 
3.3 Mission ................................................................................................................................................ 5 
4. 
Situation Analysis of the Infrastructure Sector ..................................................................................... 6 
4.1 Land and urban planning .................................................................................................................... 6 
4.2 Housing ............................................................................................................................................... 7 
4.3 Transport (Roads, Ports and Airports) ................................................................................................ 8 
4.4 
Development and Management of Water resources and Waste infrastructure ....................... 13 
4.5 Energy ............................................................................................................................................... 14 
4.6 Information Communication and Technology (ICT) .......................................................................... 15 
5. 
The Main Challenges hindering the Infrastructure Sector growth and expansion ............................. 17 
6. 
Infrastructure Sector’s Development Objectives ................................................................................ 18 
7. 
The Infrastructure Sector Strategic Policies ........................................................................................ 19 
7.1 National Urban/ Land Policy ............................................................................................................. 19 
7.2 National Housing Policy .................................................................................................................... 19 
7.3 National Transport Policies ............................................................................................................... 19 
7.4 Sustainable Energy Investment Policy and Energy Strategy ............................................................. 20 
7.5 Waste Management and Sanitation infrastructure Policy ............................................................... 20 
7.6 ICT Policy ........................................................................................................................................... 20 
8. 
The Infrastructure Sector Development Priorities .............................................................................. 21 
9. 
The Main Infrastructure Sector’s Programs during the Plan Period 2019-2023 ................................ 22 
10. 
Aggregated Resources Requirement .............................................................................................. 25 
11. 
Milestone of Infrastructure Sector development (2019-2023) ....................................................... 26 
12. 
Coordination aspects and requirements with other Sectors/activities/regions ............................ 26 
13. 
Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................... 27 
14. 
Intervention Programmes ............................................................................................................... 28
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
1. Background 
Infrastructure is subjected to damage and destruction during the course of any conflict with 
resultant decreased per capita access. As a result, restoration of infrastructure can be a major 
dividend of peace and is a critical factor in the success of post-conflict recovery. In conflict-
sensitive environments, the effectiveness of infrastructure is a contributor to and a barometer to 
determine whether a society will slip back into violence or make a peaceful transition out of the 
conflict cycle.  
Infrastructure encompasses institutions and human capabilities, as well as material and physical 
processes, systems and structures. Thus, restoration of infrastructure systems must include 
economic (transport, energy and communication) social infrastructure (water, sanitation, 
housing, schools and hospitals) and institutional infrastructure including the facilities, 
equipment, and personnel required for governance at the local and national levels. A vision and 
framework for planning, reconstruction and development of such infrastructure systems requires 
national and local in-depth stakeholder consultation to achieve legitimacy and ownership. 
Infrastructure systems in its broadest sense can be described by three main constituent 
components: assets, knowledge and institutional capacity. Infrastructure systems are acting as the 
vehicle needed to deliver goods and services to ensure the effective functioning of society. 
Without any of the above three elements there will be neither a functional asset nor capacity 
(knowledge and institutions) to manage (develop, own, operate or maintain) the assets. 
Infrastructure systems can be described as the enabler through which delivery of goods and 
essential services to the economy and society as a whole are provided. The inability for 
infrastructure to perform effectively as the enabler to supply goods and services not only limits 
the economic development of a country or region but can stifle recovery and reconstruction in a 
post conflict environment. 
Infrastructure development does not stop with the provision of built facilities; service provision 
that actually makes the physical infrastructure accessible to the citizens is likewise important. 
Roads are rehabilitated to provide access to markets and employment, hospitals are built to 
provide health services,  government buildings are rehabilitated to provide the preconditions for 
good governance and service delivery and housing, water and sanitation are needed to provide 
adequate living conditions to IDPs, returnees, urban poor and other vulnerable groups. Demands 
placed upon infrastructure systems resulting from protracted displacement, migration and rapid 
urban growth have been neglected for decades and strained existing physical infrastructure to 
and beyond their functional limits. 
In the case of Somalia, several consultations with stakeholders ranging from civil society, 
national and local authorities and international development partners have been undertaken, 
including assessments of the current state of infrastructure, the priority needs for reconstruction
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
and practical requirements to achieve priority improvements in the country. It is on this basis that 
this National Infrastructure Development Plan has been developed.  
National infrastructure planning in Somalia involves at least five key federal ministries  
• Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Reconstruction (incl. roads authority) 
• Ministry of Energy & Water Resources 
• Ministry of Transport & Civil Aviation  
• Ministry of Ports & Marine Transport 
• Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and technology  
• Directorate of Environment the Office of the Prime Minister  
 
2. Introduction 
In line with the Federal Government of Somalia’s endorsement, the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) will act as a guiding framework for the infrastructure sector development 
priorities with due consideration given to localizing the SDGs with the needs of the Somali 
people.  
The consequences of over two decades of a civil war, that has had adverse effects on the political 
and economic systems of the country and culminated in complete institutional collapse which 
can be directly felt by many Somalis who as a result have no access to fundamental public 
services. Larger scale rehabilitation and expansion of infrastructure systems will have enormous 
impact on the perception and improvement of stability in the country.  
The lack of an effective federal government since 1991 has significantly hindered the country’s 
development in particular with regard to maintaining and expanding the public infrastructure and 
developing the necessary regulatory and governance frameworks. This has left Somalia faced 
with the complex and pressing challenges of state building and reconstruction in the absence of 
endogenous sources of public revenue, and with hardly any institutional capacity.  
Development and rehabilitation of transport infrastructure (roads, ports and airports) will help re-
establish the physical links destroyed by war, facilitate the strengthening of social links, and 
expand regional trade. In the road sub-sector, there is need to re-establish regional 
interconnectivity with countries such as Ethiopia, Kenya and Djibouti, and between the various 
regions within Somalia with the aim of supporting efforts towards peace and reconciliation and 
regional linkage. Agriculture and livestock account for 65% of the Somali economy, and employ 
around the same percentage of the Somali labor force. This value chain requires specific 
attention from the perspective of trade, transport and development corridors when planning the 
transport sector in the country, also with regard to exporting livestock through Somali ports.
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Infrastructure to support the social sector, such as health facilities, schools, housing, water, 
sanitation and waste management are critical to provide decent living conditions for the Somali 
people. Somalia has some of the poorest indicators in health and education in the world, and it is 
essential to improve these types of infrastructure to allow the relevant social services actors to be 
able to effectively address these issues. The economic return from these type of investments will 
materialize in the form of improvements in health conditions and education attainment. There are 
over 1.1 million IDPs within Somalia and more than half a million Somali refugees in 
neighboring countries. All of these people will need housing, water, sanitation, health and 
education infrastructure if they are to willingly return or resettle in a sustainable and peaceful 
manner. 
This chapter addresses some of these key challenges beginning with capturing both the short and 
long term vision of the Federal Infrastructure Ministries, then progressing on to analyze the 
present conditions of the infrastructure sector, the main challenges facing the infrastructure 
sector’s growth and expansion, highlighting the sector’s development objectives, strategic 
policies and sector development priorities. This chapter will also highlight the infrastructure 
sector’s main programs needed to achieve the defined sectorial objectives for 2017 to 2019 while 
also assessing the aggregated resources required and planning the milestones for infrastructure 
development. Finally, it will engage in a discussion on the coordination mechanisms required to 
successfully implement the strategic objectives and activities across Somalia. 
3. Vision and overall objective for Somalia Infrastructure 
Development:   
 
3.1 Overall Objective for the infrastructure sector in 2019 to 2023:  
Revitalize, operate and maintain essential infrastructure and services to improve stability and set 
foundations for social, economic and sustainable development. 
 
3.2 Vision 
Somalia created infrastructure that enhances the employment, increases food security, builds up 
resilience to climate change and variability, respect Somali cultural heritage and is 
environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
3.3 Mission 
The short term (5 years) vision for Somalia’s infrastructure is to lay out the foundations of 
resilient infrastructure systems1 that will contribute to the countries stability and will provide the 
 
1 Resilience is the ability of assets, networks and systems to anticipate, absorb, adapt to and/ or rapidly 
recover from a disruptive event. Source: UK cabinet office, ‘Section A: Introduction, Definitions and
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
necessary services for all (setup the organizational structures & capacity, infrastructure 
standards, legislations, priorities, strategies, mobilize resources and planning for long term 
infrastructure development, land and urban planning), while simultaneously rehabilitating, 
(re)constructing, upgrading, mapping and developing the existing infrastructure systems in 
compliance with SDGs, IGAD Infrastructure Master Plan and Africa Infrastructure Strategy   to 
create infrastructure that enhances the employment, increases food security, builds up resilience 
to climate change and variability, respect Somali cultural heritages and is environmentally and 
economically sustainable. 
In the long term (15 years/2030) Somalia is envisioning to have its infrastructure serve Somalia, 
the people of the Horn of Africa and IGAD countries, to facilitate economic and social 
development (interconnecting the nation and the region, with modern telecommunication, so that 
Somali citizens have access to affordable energy, water and appropriate waste disposal systems, 
adequate and sustainable housing, under the guidance of proper urban and territorial planning 
and financed and maintained in a sustainable manner. 
Sustainability of existing and new or rehabilitated infrastructure must also be considered 
throughout the plan. Budget for operation and maintenance is essential to ensure the assets are 
kept in working condition and future repair costs are minimized. 
 
4. Situation Analysis of the Infrastructure Sector 
The collapse of the Somali State during the civil war culminated in the destruction of public and 
private infrastructure assets and systems including roads, seaports, airports, water, energy , 
sewage systems factories, hospitals, laboratories, schools, businesses and ministries as well as 
the loss of legislative and other key documents that provided regulatory or planning frameworks 
for the infrastructure sector. Protracted displacement, internal migration and rapid urbanization 
pose an additional challenge to service delivery and planning in the infrastructure sector. This 
impact can be felt when analyzing the present conditions of key infrastructure components.  
 
4.1 Land and urban planning 
 
The urbanization process in Somalia has been happening haphazardly, with no spatial planning 
or urban management. While some urban centers of the main settlement are relatively structured 
in terms of lay-out, based on pre-civil war planning attempts, much of the urban space, including 
vacant space within the formal urban fabric, holds pockets of ‘nomadic’ tents (‘buuls’) belonging 
 
Principles of Infrastructure Resilience’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78902/section-a-
natural-hazards-infrastructure.pdf
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
to internally displaced communities or recent arrivals of refuge returnees. As such, the impact of 
IDPs on land ownership and thus any type of intervention in urban areas is substantial. In some 
areas former farmland is being converted into ‘urban’ land by tracing a grid with a bulldozer, 
subdividing it into plots, leaving no space for public infrastructure and taking little account of 
potential natural hazards, for instance from flooding.  IDP settlements are often concentrated in 
peri-urban areas of large cities and constitute there a significant settlement typology2 which has 
grown uncontrolled and unplanned and is characterized by high density, lack of social services, 
absence of livelihood opportunities and devastating living conditions. 
While the Somali construction sector is booming due to the current reconstruction activities in 
the country, the infrastructure ministries at federal and state level are operating in a grey zone 
without any up to date urban legislation. The majority of legislation for the infrastructure sector 
dates to a pre-war period and its status is either not clarified or not existing. Regional and local 
governments lack guidance through policies, norms and standards and the few current 
infrastructure rehabilitation projects are not built hand in hand with planning of related service 
provision. 
The same applies to land management. With the exception of Puntland, land legislation on 
managing land and resolving land disputes at the municipal level is largely outdated.3 
 
4.2 Housing 
 
Access to adequate housing4 is a challenge growing fast with Somalia’s high urbanization rate5. 
1,106,751 or 9% of the population or 14.7% of households are IDPs6 of which most live in 
camps and informal settlements.  An increasing number of urban dwellers, especially the most 
poor and vulnerable groups (not only IDPs, but also women-headed households, refugee 
returnees, persons with disabilities and youth) are living in precarious conditions, addressing 
their housing needs informally, lacking access to basic services, isolated from livelihood 
opportunities and vulnerable to forced evictions or homelessness. Somalia’s public and private 
 
2 For instance, in Mogadishu 33% of the cities IDP live in the peri-urban district of Deynille in 142 informal 
settlements, 19% in Kaxda in 112 informal settlements and another 17% in Hodan. Source: UNHCR, ‘Internal 
displacement profiling in Mogadishu’, April 2016 
3 Law N°10, 17 Dec. 1980 – Administration of Building Land for Banaadir Region, Law N°41, 13 Sep. 1973 – Urban 
Land Distribution, Decree 31, 31 Dec. 1973 – Nomination of Chairpersons of Regions and Districts, Law N° 73, 21 
Oct. 1975 – Agricultural Land Law, Law N° 23, 16 Oct. 1976 – Law 23 on Agriculture.  All of these laws are not valid 
as they do not relate to the current Constitution. 
4 For housing to be adequate, it must, at a minimum, meet the following criteria: Security of tenure; Availability of 
services, materials, facilities and infrastructure; Affordability; Habitability; Accessibility; Location and Cultural 
Adequacy. Source: UNHCR and UN-Habitat, ‘The Right to Adequate Housing’, Fact Sheet No. 21 (Rev1) 
5 4.06% annual rate of urbanization growth (2010-15 est.), source CIA ’The World Fact Book’. Mogadishu is the 2nd 
fastest growing city in the world. 
6 Population Estimation Survey, Federal Government of Somalia and UNFPA, Oct 2014
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
housing stock has after more than 20 years of conflict been largely destroyed7. Adequate housing 
is not affordable to IDPs and the urban poor, and affordable housing is not adequate.  
 
Protracted internal displacement situations exist in all regions, most of them in urban areas. The 
majority of IDPs settle in informal and unplanned settlements with inadequate housing, regularly 
at risk of forced eviction and in deplorable and impoverished living conditions. Most settlements 
are controlled and dominated by gatekeepers. The urban dimension of the protracted nature of 
displacement is evident and in many instances IDP settlements have turned into urban slums and 
sites of urban impoverishment, where economic migrants, returnees, refugees and urban poor 
have joined IDPs. While protracted displacement is a rather static situation, newly displaced 
persons regularly join existing IDP settlements adding further pressure on the community. 
Furthermore, IDPs are not a homogenous group when it comes to their displacement history. 
Many have been displaced during different phases and types of armed conflict, others by clan 
conflict, by drought or famine or by other disasters triggered by natural hazards, such as 
recurrent floods. Still others had to move due to forced evictions. Many IDPs have been 
repeatedly displaced several times due to various causes.8 
 
The Somali population is growing by almost 3% per year, with a high fertility rate of 6.26 
children per woman, which is the 4th highest in the world.9 Based on this anticipated growth rate 
the Somali population will grow to approx. 14.3M people by the end of 2019 or by 1.2M people 
in the three year period covered by the NDP. Housing strategies need therefore take into account 
not only the deficit of adequate housing for the current population, in particular for the urban 
poor, IDPs and refugee returnees but also plan for the natural population growth.  
 
 
4.3 Transport (Roads, Ports and Airports)10 
 
Transport vison Efficient transport infrastructure is essential within an economy as it dictates the 
type of economic and social activities that can be conducted within a particular section of the 
country. One of the most important factors for making investment decisions is the availability of 
proper transport networks that facilitate the movement of goods, services as well as workers. 
Moreover, a well-developed transport network enables the underdeveloped communities to 
access essential goods and services. The transport infrastructure is also particularly important in 
enabling connectivity which will enable the efficient delivery of other infrastructure programs 
 
7 In 2005, it was estimated that about 85% of the total population was living in slums or partially destroyed 
housing. About 40 villages were damaged or destroyed by the tsunami of December 2004. Source: 
http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Somalia.aspx 
8 Somalia IDP Solutions Initiative, Prof. Walter Kaelin, Special Advisor to the DSRSG/RC/HC on Internally Displaced 
Persons, ‘Mission report 27 Jan to 11 Feb 2016’ 
9 Source: http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/somalia-population/ 
10 Compare ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
and other development plans. There is the potential to link Somalia with land-locked countries in 
the region (Ethiopia, South Sudan, Uganda and Central Africa) through rehabilitation of inter-
state and inter-regional road corridors, development of railway & air connectivity and also transit 
service facilities. 
4.3.1 Roads11 
 
 
Map 1: Overall road network of Somalia12 
 
The 21,933km long road network in Somalia is in poor to very poor condition. 90 % of the 
primary roads have deteriorated and are well past their designed life-span.13 With a huge 
maintenance backlog, there is a significant need for reconstructing or resurfacing these existing 
paved roads throughout all of Somalia.  Within the country, only 2,860 km (13%) of a total 
21,830 km of roads are paved. The rest of the network is earthen or gravel. A major part of the 
investment in the roads and transport program can deliver livelihoods and cash transfer benefits 
while improving the infrastructure. Overall in Somalia, approximately 80% of the population 
living in settlements, towns and cities resides in only 10 large cities14, this is 50 per cent of the 
total Somali population. In the short term, priority also needs to be given to roads serving main 
cities, towns and settlements. This will help create employment, link markets, and reduce the 
cost of doing business, making Somali enterprises more competitive. Somalia is also not well 
connected to its neighbors. This limits economic activities such as trade within the region. An 
independent Roads Agency on the federal level does not exist for the time being but would 
significantly contribute to coordination of rehabilitation and maintenance efforts in the country. 
 
11 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015, p. 68 ff. 
12 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015 
13 Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015, p. 68 ff. 
14 Mogadishu, Hargeisa, Bosasso, Galkayo, Berbera, Merca, Jamame, Borama, Kismayo and Baidoa
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Competences for road construction, rehabilitation and maintenance are so far distributed between 
several ministries decreasing the efficiency of all ongoing and intended interventions. 
 
 
 
Road classification and surfacing data:15 
Type of 
surfacing 
 
Primary/ Main 
roads 
 
Secondary 
roads 
 
Rural/Feeder 
roads 
All roads  
 
Percentage 
Paved 
2,442 
418 
- 
2,860 
13% 
Gravel 
- 
844 
- 
844 
4% 
Earth 
220 
3,588 
14,421 
18,229 
83% 
 
2,662 
4,850 
14,421 
21,933 
100% 
 
 
4.3.2 Ports16 
 
 
Map 2: Existing Somali ports17 
 
Somalia’s strategic location at the Horn of Africa on the Suez Canal shipping route and the 
longest country coastline (3,330 km) in Africa offers a great advantage to port operators. Despite 
the long shoreline Somalia has only four deep-water ports. Built in the 1980s, these four major 
operational ports in Somalia are situated in the economic centers of Mogadishu, Berbera, 
Kismayo and Bosasso, with only Mogadishu and Berbera handling significant volumes of traffic. 
 
15 Infrastructure Cluster Report, World Bank, 2006 
16 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015, p. 98 ff. 
17 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
All these ports were originally under the control of the Somali Ports Authority, which no longer 
exists.  
 
Somalia’s ports are important for the country’s exports, which are heavily concentrated around 
livestock that makes up 81% of all the total exports, oil seeds (10.5%) and animal hides and 
skins (2.4 %) with Saudi Arabia being the largest trade destination accounting for over 55% of 
all exports by value. Largest import sectors are the construction sector and related industries as 
well as food items (vegetables, flour, cereals, dairy products and tobacco), together comprising 
62% of total imports. Though there is easing of security situation, Somali ports had been badly 
affected by piracy with 237 cases reported in 2010, 75 in 2012 and 15 in 2013.  
 
Despite the devastating effects of the civil war and due to rehabilitation activities undertaken in 
support to humanitarian operations between 2007 and 2013, these major ports are in reasonably 
good condition. However, the ports face considerable challenges in augmenting their operating 
performance, which is poor for two main reasons: First, the ports have limited equipment, with 
most of the cargo handling being carried out using the gear of the ships themselves. Second, they 
are operated by the government with a large pool of unionized dockworkers and based on 
outdated working practices. These challenges limit the capacity of the port to meet the demands 
of economic growth. As the primary mode of importing and exporting economic goods into the 
country, the capacity of ports needs to be enhanced in order to strengthen the potential for 
economic growth. To facilitate exports rehabilitation of feeder and coastal roads linking the ports 
to interior agricultural productive zones of the country are needed.  
 
4.3.3 Airports18 
 
 
18 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015, p. 81 ff.
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
 
Map3: Major airports and airstrips in Somalia19 
 
Somalia has an estimated number of 60 airstrips, airfields and airports evenly spread across the 
country and developed since independence mainly for military strategic reasons. There are 7 
major feeder airports, and 23 other important airstrips. The 6 main airports include Mogadishu, 
Berbera, Hargeisa, Bosasso (recently upgraded), Garowe and Kismayo. Almost all other major 
urban centers also maintain at least one airstrip that is capable of handling a small aircraft. 
With its thin population, spread out over a large area with only a few large urban centers and 
with a roving pastoral population of 40%, airports are critical for national and international 
connectivity, access and mobility. Airports and the aviation industry are a critical backbone of 
the national economy due to its important role in delivering critical humanitarian and 
emergency assistance to large vulnerable population groups, ensuring high value trade benefits 
for the economy and as a generator for revenue and job creation. Somalia’s per-capita income is 
among the lowest in the world. As a result, the ability of Somalis to pay for commercial aviation 
is low. Somalia’s aviation sector is underdeveloped in comparison with other African states, as 
well as with the rest of the world. Somalia has very low levels of commercial aircraft activity 
and passenger movements, and some inherent limitations with regard to the operating 
environment, political instability and internal conflicts. The various regions and governments 
need to have a well-defined role as regulators and facilitators of growth in the aviation 
environment.   
The absence of a Somali Civil Aviation Authority is a major challenge to control and develop of 
the aviation sector, as well as the lack of aviation equipment and skilled human resources.  Adan 
 
19 ‘Transport Sector Needs Assessment’, FGS, AfDB, EU and UNOPS, Dec 2015
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Abdulle Osman Mogadishu airport is almost unable to handle the present traffic demand in and 
around Mogadishu. In a short while the demand can duple in comparation of the present 
situation. Mogadishu definitely need a new airport that can handle the increasing demand of air 
traffic.  
 
 
4.4 
Development and Management of Water resources and Waste 
infrastructure 
 
4.4.1 Water  
A large portion of Somalia’s population relies on uncontrolled, low quality shallow-wells for its 
water supply. Majority of the water sources in rural areas are dug wells (62%) and boreholes 
(19%) complemented by surface water sources. Urban areas depend mainly on deep groundwater 
complemented by dug wells for water supply. Overall access to improved water supply in 
Somalia increased from 21% in 2000 to 30% in 2011. However, proportion of rural dwellers 
with access to water and sanitation significantly decreased from 15% to 7%, while that of urban 
areas increased from 35% to 66% in the same period. Existing urban and rural infrastructure 
systems are aged and in some cases destroyed during the prolonged civil war. About 60% of 
existing water supply infrastructure assets require rehabilitation, expansion or replacement in 
both urban and rural areas to meet the increasing demand.  
 
The extreme shortage of surface water in parts of the country, especially in Puntland and 
Galmudug states, means that groundwater is the only reliable water source and this is at depths 
of up to 400 meters in some areas. Due to the depth of the groundwater, rural water supplies 
often rely on diesel-powered pumping systems, which require regular maintenance from skilled 
mechanics, who are only found in urban areas. Studies show that up to 40 per cent of the water 
supplies are non-functional at any one time. In urban settings where water systems have been 
established in the past they are usually operated by private or public-private partnerships. These 
urban water supply services are often uncoordinated and unregulated resulting in inefficiency 
and non-optimal use of available resources. In other urban areas surface water or shallow wells 
are used, but are at high risk of contamination, as most urban waste is disposed of into open 
drains.  
4.4.2. Waste Management and Sanitation infrastructure  
The water supply sector is confronted with the challenges to accelerate delivery of improved 
water infrastructure services while lacking institutional and organizational capacities, policies 
and regulatory framework, adequate sector financing, and skilled labor, that would be key to 
building the capacity of the sector, enhancing its operation, maintenance and delivery 
mechanisms. Absence of adequate infrastructure for harnessing the available surface and ground 
water potential hinders easy, reliable and equitable access to water supply for domestic and 
agricultural uses.
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
In urban areas, while some pilot initiatives have explored sustainable approaches towards solid 
waste management, most are characterized by informal dump sites, dirty streets and absence of 
sustainable solid waste collection systems and facilities. In Somalia, municipalities have limited 
human and technical capacity and skills to carry out sustainable and systematic solid waste 
collection and management. In some cities small private companies are involved in waste 
collection and disposal but contracts with municipalities are often of short duration, a fact that 
hinders larger investment in technical equipment. Urban communities are used to disposing off 
household, business and hospital waste on the streets or informal dump sites and are reluctant to 
pay for regular waste collection and management. Urban residents are, after more than 20 years 
of conflict, used to irregular city clean up campaigns based on cash for work type activities and 
lack understanding of the importance of sustainable and regular solid waste collection and 
management. Urban poor, in particular women and youth, often collect household and business 
waste for a small fee and dispose it unregulated and uncontrolled. The few existing formal waste 
disposal sites do not meet minimum environmental standards. There is a huge potential for 
private-public partnerships centered on recycling and reuse which can generate employment and 
SME opportunities, biomass energy, natural fertilisers, etc. In rural areas there are no solid or 
liquid waste disposal methods. Knowledge of the risks to health is very poor and there is no 
incentive or motivation for people to dispose of their waste properly.  
Sanitation 
Access to improved sanitation in urban areas jumped from 45% in 2000 to 52% in 2014. About 
3% of the urban dwellers resort to open defecation. However without any functioning sanitation 
system or sewers in the urban areas, most human waste is disposed of directly into open drains. 
Access to improved sanitation in rural areas decreased from 10% to 6% over the same period. 
Approximately 83% of the rural population practices open defecation. This explains the observed 
high incidence of water and sanitation related diseases. . For the past 25 years the incidence of 
diarrhea in children under five years has remained at alarming high level of 23% in spite of 
improvement in access to improved water sources. About 40% of sanitation infrastructure 
systems require rehabilitation in both urban and rural areas  
There are no sewerage systems in urban areas of Somalia and in rural areas less than one third of 
households have their own latrine. Most schools and health centres have very poor water and 
sanitation infrastructure. Where these exist there are no recurring funds to ensure maintenance 
and repair. 
 
4.5 Energy20 
 
The limited availability, reliability and the high cost of energy are major constraints on economic 
growth in Somalia. The energy mix in Somalia is reliant upon locally available charcoal and 
 
20 Compare ‘Energy Sector Needs Assessment’ , FGS and AfDB, Aug 2015
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
firewood as the core sources of energy, meeting nearly 80 to 90% of the energy needs of the 
whole country and resulting in excessive exploitation of these primary sources. Annual 
consumption of charcoal is estimated at around 4 million tons per year, equivalent to about 400 
kg/capita/annum, a rate that is fast exhausting Somali’s few forests. The prevalence of charcoal 
and wood for cooking also has serious health impacts at the household level that can be mitigated 
by the introduction of cleaner, more efficient and cost-effective end-use devices and modern and 
environmentally friendly cooking fuels.  Petroleum products, essentially for transport, electricity 
generation, cooking and lighting account for about 10% of the total energy use. Electric power 
generation (almost entirely diesel-fueled) accounts for about 2 of these 10%. Several cities 
(Garowe, Hargeisa, Bosaaso, Berbera, Qardo) have small, generally dilapidated grids which are 
not always in use. Overall, the total installed and operational generating capacity in Somalia is 
estimated to be 80 to 85 MW at estimated 250,000 connections. Drops in voltage are frequent 
and supply is limited to 5 to 6 hours per day. The low tension (480/220 V) over sometimes long 
distances leads to tension and technical losses with most small generators reporting 40% to 50% 
power loss.21 
On the other hand, renewable energy potential is abundant. The solar energy potential ranges 
from 5 to 7 kWh/m2/day with over 310 sunny days in a year or 3,000 hours of sunshine per 
annum. Somalia is also characterized by strong wind regimes with annual average speeds of 1.5 
to 11.4 m/s with potential for small hydro power (around 100 to120 MW) along the Shabelle and 
Juba rivers.22  
Due to the lack of investment, the volatile security situation and the absence of public resources 
and public oversight, the potential to cultivate electricity and expand electricity infrastructure 
systems and markets has been hampered over the past two decades.  Renewable and alternative 
energy sources, such as solar and wind power, present substantive opportunities to diversify and 
expand the energy infrastructure systems of Somalia but so far has not been harnessed, due to 
both security and funding problems. Developing both fossil and renewable resources will require 
a functioning transport and logistics sector and fiscal regimes which promote private sector 
investments. Major challenges experienced within the energy sector include inadequate qualified 
and skilled personnel as well as limited access to, generation, transmission and distribution of 
electricity power, depletion of biomass, and low penetration of modern and environmentally 
friendly energy, especially in the rural areas. 
Some investments have been made in solar energy by international donors and aid agencies. In 
the water and health sectors there are successful solar powered pumping systems and vaccine 
refrigeration units working in health centers across the country, sustainably for almost a decade. 
 
 
4.6 Information Communication and Technology (ICT)23 
 
21 ‘Energy Sector Needs Assessment’ , FGS and AfDB, Aug 2015, p.11 
22 ‘Energy Sector Needs Assessment’ , FGS and AfDB, Aug 2015, p.15 
23 Compare ‘Needs Assessment of ICT Sector in Somalia’, FGS and AfDB, July 2014
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
 
The ICT sector in Somalia has flourished under a self-regulated private sector regime and is 
known to be a key contributor to the economy. Somalia’s ICT market consists of 11 operators 
and 4 million mobile connections, but tele-density is only about 7% and the proportion of 
Internet users is growing rapidly. However, ICT is one of the fastest growing sectors and the 
third largest industry by employment in the country. The sector employs around 25,000 Somalis, 
generates substantial profit and has enabled a mobile penetration rate of about 10 subscriptions 
per 100 people. Most readily available ICT media are radio and mobile phones. The TV and 
press sectors are weak, with radio being the dominant medium. The country has more than 50 
FM radio stations. Mogadishu alone has 20 stations. 
 
86% of households have access to radio and 26% to TV. Radio and TV sub-sectors need to be 
further developed as employment and revenue generating sectors. 
However, Somalia has just developed ICT policy and regulations to guide infrastructure roll-out 
as well as the development of ICT applications such as mobile money transfer. The country’s 
volatile security and lack of stable energy sources greatly hinder growth in the ICT sector. Low 
literacy and ICT skill levels among vast groups of the population limit demand for ICT services 
in the country. 
Somalia has access to the East Africa Sub-marine Cable System (internet) with Mogadishu and 
Bosaaso so far being the only landing points that also connects to local optic-fibre cable lines. 
Somalia is, however, extremely close to several major undersea cable networks which connect 
Europe, the Gulf Region in Middle East and India trough the Gulf of Aden and transfer a major 
share of the globalized Information Economy of the 21st century, for example through the 
Europe-India-Gateway (EIG) or India-Middle East-Western Europe (I-ME-WE) network. The 
strategic position of Somalia has not been explored when it comes to investment opportunities 
for the growing number of educated young people who do not find adequate jobs at the domestic 
labor market.
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
5. The Main Challenges hindering the Infrastructure Sector growth 
and expansion  
Despite the progress made towards peace and stability, Somalia continues to face major 
challenges in revitalizing the infrastructure sector. Systemic challenges include weak 
institutional frameworks and the absence of an integrated and long term national infrastructure 
plan that is grounded in a sustainable approach to development for all the regions in the country.    
The absence of and lack of funding to enforce harmonized policies and regulatory frameworks at 
the federal and local levels of government including basic standards such as building codes also 
inhibits the development of the sector as it prevents the capacity of government structures to 
effectively regulate ongoing projects. The lack of water quality standards hinders the possibility 
of regulation of private water supply companies, and the control of industries which might cause 
pollution to water sources. This challenge is further exacerbated by a dearth of infrastructure 
professionals and a skilled labor force, who can substantively contribute their technical capacity 
to the development of the sector. The absence of both is adversely impacting the capacity to 
adequately deliver, monitor and maintain quality infrastructure systems. 
Dual claims over land, unresolved land disputes and informal occupation of public land hinder 
both private and public investments for infrastructure assets, in particular in the urban areas. 
The extremely limited capacity of Somalia’s existing four deep-sea ports combined with the high 
percentage of imported construction materials (hardly any in-country production) does not only 
lead to high construction and transportation costs but also creates a serious bottle neck for 
scaling up construction and rehabilitation investments and efforts. 
Gaping budgetary constraints and Somalia’s inability to access international financing for large-
scale infrastructure projects have also limited the possibilities of investment in the sector. 
Because of the lack of a centralized coordination and regulatory mechanism, haphazard sector 
development activities hamper the realization of the long term national vision, underpinned and 
delivered through a systems-based approach to long term national infrastructure planning. 
Furthermore, there are no significant budget allocations for the maintenance of infrastructure 
investments. 
The volatile security situation in large parts of the country poses specific security threats that 
hinder expansion of the infrastructure sector: ensuring security of workers, materials and works 
during rehabilitation works in insecure areas, safeguarding long infrastructure networks/ 
pipelines after completion, creation of critical but vulnerable infrastructure assets in particular 
with regards to energy plants and securing large scale immobile investments. 
As security challenges continue, investment in the development of private and public 
infrastructure will struggle to take off.
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
 
6. Infrastructure Sector’s Development Objectives 
 
Overcoming the challenges to infrastructure rehabilitation, social service provision and human 
capacity to plan, operate and maintain the infrastructure assets as well as connecting investment 
in infrastructure to the long-term development of Somalia is the overarching long-term objective 
of the infrastructure development sector. At the same time there is need to put in place short to 
medium term practical and cost effective infrastructure sub-sector programs that consider 
poverty reduction (SDG1), build resilient infrastructure (SDG9), ensure access to affordable 
energy (SDG7), achieve equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water and sanitation 
(SDG6) and make cities safe, resilient and sustainable (SDG11), improve food and nutrition 
security through the use of more reliable and accessible cooking fuels (SDG2) and sustainably 
manage forest, combat desertification, adapt and mitigate against climate change (SDG13) and 
protect biodiversity through substitution of biomass (SDG15). Through an integrated approach to 
infrastructure system development, stability as well as economic, socio-political and 
environmental sustainability will be achieved. 
  
Overall Objective for the infrastructure sector in 2018 to 2023:  
Revitalize, operate and maintain essential infrastructure and services to improve stability and set 
foundations for social, economic and sustainable development. 
Key among the infrastructure sector’s development objectives include: 
  
i. 
Strengthen policy and regulatory frameworks at the Federal Infrastructure Ministries to 
guide, plan and implement infrastructure development and related social service 
provision; 
 
ii. 
Strengthen institutional and technical capacities of different infrastructure sub-sectors to 
be able to plan, implement, operate, maintain and monitor sector specific infrastructure 
and service development; 
 
iii. 
Sub-sector specific objectives include: 
a. Improve mobility and connectivity throughout Somalia and to the neighboring 
region and the world with a strong focus on rehabilitation and maintenance of 
existing infrastructure (such Airports, SeaPorts and Roads) while protecting the 
Environment and cultural herritages; 
b. Strengthen urban and territorial planning processes,   
c. Improve access to clean energy systems and equitable access to safe and 
affordable drinking water and sanitation,
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
d. Increase access to adequate and affordable housing in particular for IDPs, 
returnees, the urban poor and other persons in vulnerable situations, 
e. Provide telecommunication networks that ensure free and rapid flow of 
information. 
 
7. The Infrastructure Sector Strategic Policies  
Development of several sector specific policies will provide a strong legal framework to support 
stability and infrastructure system development in Somalia. Key among the policies needed to 
facilitate this includes: 
  
7.1 National Urban/ Land Policy 
Land related conflict is by far the largest driver of conflict across Somalia.24 Lack of clear land 
tenure system with customary and formal land ownership systems operating together affects not 
only infrastructure development but also reintegration of the Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs). Destruction of land registries, related information and lack of a functional legal system 
makes land administration even harder. Unresolved occupation of land and property requires 
sustainable solutions to enable medium and large-scale infrastructure investments, proper urban 
planning and sustainable housing solutions. A functioning system of land administration needs to 
be re-built. A land policy that creates institutions and laws to meet claims for property restitution 
and that shapes future social and economic structures is needed, without which infrastructure and 
other investment will be deterred. Urban land policies and related legal and regulatory 
frameworks would prevent overcrowding, public health risks and the development of slums. As a 
first step towards a practical and functional solution based on successful local interventions and 
best practices needs to be developed to accommodate the instant need for urban planning and 
serviced land. 
7.2 National Housing Policy 
Housing rights challenges are common in Somalia like in other post conflict countries. Post  
conflict  housing  reconstruction  would play an  important  role  in  establishing  the  Somali’s 
development  and prospect  of peace. A National Housing Policy addressing widespread property 
destruction, mass population return and internal displacement, reconstruction needs of the post 
conflict communities, innovative housing finance mechanisms and promotion of local building 
culture is needed. 
7.3 National Transport Policies  
 
Policies and regulatory frameworks for the transport sector are required to ensure development 
of effective, efficient, and safe land, air and marine transport systems. Regulations need to steer 
 
24
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
both public and private investments in line with the national priorities and support economic 
growth through the provision of better access to employment and enhance social service 
provision. 
Establishment of competent transport authorities or administrations is essential for management 
of transport sector resources. Preparation and ratification of the new codes as well as other 
relevant international conventions is mandatory to regulate the transport sector operations and 
give confidence to potential investors.  
 
7.4 Sustainable Energy Investment Policy and Energy Strategy 
The Federal Government of Somalia does not have any policies or regulations specific to the 
energy sector.  The Energy Sector Management Department of the Federal Ministry also lacks 
human and financial capacity. Little capacity is available to develop legal and regulatory 
frameworks; hence the sector operates in a vacuum. However, Somalia is endowed with 
renewable energy resources to increase affordable energy supply for Somalia. To harness the 
potential of renewable energy sources, strengthen the energy sector, increase its efficiency and 
affordability, policies, related regulations and strategies for implementation are inevitable. As a 
first step a Sustainable Energy Investment Policy focusing on energy efficiency, renewable 
energy and promoting decentralized renewable energy systems as well as the development of an 
Energy Strategy for the whole country, which takes into account the role of the private sector, are 
essential. 
7.5 Waste Management and Sanitation infrastructure Policy 
The  water supply, sanitation infrastructure and waste management sector in Somalia is generally 
driven by a vibrant private sector with complementary services from the public sector, primarily 
in urban areas. Despite the public sector playing a facilitative role, the sector lacks a policy and 
regulative framework hindering adequate and systematic sector development. Urgent 
institutional strengthening and sector capacity building to address institutional and organizational 
development and capacity deficiency challenges is needed. The Inter-Ministerial WASH 
Steering Committee is currently working on the development of a WASH Policy. This policy 
will cover all aspects of WASH in Somalia including water supply and quality, sanitation and 
waste management, hygiene education and behavioral change. The WASH Policy will have a 
human rights-based approach and is aligned to the relevant SDGs. The policy will define roles 
and responsibilities for this overlapping sector.  
7.6 ICT Policy  
The area of the policy and regulatory implementation is the number one priority for development 
of Somalia’s ICT sector to harness the potential of further investments, job creation and 
expanded post and e-service provision.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
8. The Infrastructure Sector Development Priorities  
Infrastructure development in Somalia currently takes place on land only. Capacity and 
institutional development in land and urban policy development including reconstitution of land 
registries provides a foundation for land-based infrastructure system development. Somali cities 
are growing quickly, as a first step a simple and basic planning framework is needed to plan for 
urban growth and identify and plan city extension areas to accommodate and integrate IDPs and 
refugee returnees and provide housing strategies for the urban poor and rural - urban migrants.  
Somalia’s road networks are nearly all earthen. Those paved are mostly in poor to very poor 
condition.  Maintenance and the need for reconstruction or resurfacing of existing paved roads 
need to take priority, whilst also taking into consideration the need to ensure their resilience to 
climate change and variability. However, this needs to go hand in hand with institutional and 
technical capacity development and with a robust maintenance regime that requires regular 
funding from the annual budget. There is further a need for the establishment of road funds and 
innovative ways of generating for regular road maintenance. 
A safe, secure and cost-effective aviation regulatory system will underpin the future 
development of air services and instill confidence to operate and invest. Somalia needs to 
establish a credible regulatory platform from which to develop, service, and fill gaps in the 
current aviation system. Priority should be given to establish the Somali Civil Aviation 
Authority (SCAA). The other priority is the construction of the new gateway Mogadishu airport 
which can handle the increasing demand of the air traffic in the next decennia. Also, the re-
establishment of the national carrier is a priority for the Somali Civil Aviation ministry.  
 
Somalia port’s tonnage is expected to increase to around 3.3 million tons by 2025, an almost 
65% increase. Given the present berth occupancy rates of 20% at below par handling speeds and 
high costs, improvement in specialized handling capacity, hinterland connectivity and port 
information system to track its performance is of great priority.  
The improvement and increased access to energy through use of renewable energy and to 
substitute biomass fuels in households is vital. Actual investments should focus on providing 
affordable, consistent and renewable energy at scale. However, technical capacity development 
for the sector authorities is needed to roll-out basic regulatory framework to guide development. 
 
The area of policy and regulatory implementation is the number one priority for development of 
Somalia’s ICT sector. This includes the development of a framework to implement the 
telecommunications sector policy and regulations to build Somali ICT infrastructure. 
Independent regulatory authority is established and key regulatory issues are identified which is 
great importance for Somali ICT infrastructure investment. Furthermore, there is also need to
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
ensure that Somalia complies with the international cut-off date for migration from analogue to 
digital transmission. 
 
In short to medium term, strategic interventions in water and sanitation will be rehabilitation and/ 
or extension of rural and urban water and sanitation infrastructure systems to improve service 
delivery and ensure sustainable management. Institutional strengthening and sector capacity 
building to address institutional and organizational development and capacity deficiency 
challenges is needed as well as ground water resource mapping to provide updated and more 
reliable data on aquifers, including aquifer monitoring and management to avoid over 
exploitation.  
 
9. The Main Infrastructure Sector’s Programs during the Plan 
Period 2019-2023 
 
i. 
Institutional Capacity Building Program for the Infrastructure Ministries 
• Support in development of policies and regulatory frameworks governing the sector 
and linking them to those of international and regional associations and bodies such 
as EAC, COMESA, NEPAD, ICAO, IMO etc., 
• Undertake comprehensive capacity enhancement, including development of 
standards, procedures and technical trainings on effective reconstruction, 
infrastructure financing, assessment and planning, managing, maintenance and 
procurement of public infrastructure works in Somalia.  
 
ii. 
National Land, Physical Planning and Urban Solutions Program 
• Develop  national land and urban policies with a focus on climate change adaptation 
and mitigation and natural disaster planning, 
• Lay-out foundation or road map for reconstruction of national land cadaster and 
registry,  
• Develop national public land inventory – to facilitate infrastructure system 
development,  
• Strengthen institutional and technical capacities (human resource and technical 
skills) of national and regional planning institutions, including in economic, social 
and environmental assessments (e.g. Strategic Environment Assessments), 
• Facilitate planning  of regional development corridors and settlement systems,  
• Develop regional and urban strategic plans with special focus on urbanization and 
local economic development, and develop spatial strategic plans for all state capitals 
and other urban centers which guide city extension and other urban development 
plans,
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
• Undertake urban renewal/ reconstruction and expansion including rehabilitation of 
public space, 
• Develop and implement Urban Regulatory Frameworks for new states and for 
Mogadishu. 
 
 
iii. 
National Housing Program: Adequate, Affordable and Sustainable Housing 
• Develop resettlement and integration solutions that are durable and at the same time 
upgrade conditions of temporary IDP shelter to meet minimum living standards 
through participatory pilot projects, 
• Develop National Urban Housing Sector Profile and National Housing Policy, 
• Facilitate access to land for housing development, 
• Identify and promote suitable and sustainable alternative construction techniques, 
and promote a local building culture, which makes use of local raw materials and 
labor, is affordable and of low embodied energy, and spurs local economic 
development in the short and long term, 
• Identify and, if necessary, establish supply chains, 
• Establish municipal housing programs (including rental subsidy programs or owner 
driven incremental reconstruction using micro-credits for purchase of building 
materials). 
 
iv. 
Roads Improvement Program 
• Develop policies and regulatory frameworks to guide future roads maintenance, 
expansion and related service delivery, 
• Establish an independent Highway authority at federal level, 
• Develop a robust maintenance regime, 
• Establish reliable and regular funding for the road agency in order to ensure no 
medium-term collapse of the existing road system, 
• Strengthen institutional and technical capacity to design, build and maintain roads, 
• Plan, rehabilitate and expand inter-state and inter-regional road corridors,  
• Plan, rehabilitate and expand urban roads, 
• Create employment opportunities through labor-intensive approaches to roads 
rehabilitation incorporating appropriate labor policies, standards and procedures, 
• Prioritize use of locally produced construction materials to enhance private sector 
development and employment creation. 
 
v. 
Ports (Upgrading) Program 
• Establish Somali Maritime Administration/Authority,
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
• Develop detailed Somalia Ports Development Strategy, update Somali Merchant 
Shipping Act, prepare and ratify the new maritime code and localize International 
Conventions for shipping and seafarers, 
• Institutional strengthening of authorities responsible for managing different ports,  
• Expand/ upgrade the existing deep-sea ports and develop strategy for one new port, 
incl. rehabilitation of seamarks and lighthouses of the Somali coastline, 
• Rehabilitate and expand existing cost barge berths, 
• Harmonize port charges as a source of government revenue and facilitate sustainable 
use by local exporters, 
• Conduct feasibility studies and technical assessments for planning future investments, 
• Extend network of secondary ports and jetties to facilitate development of local 
fisheries and improve sea-based transport links. 
 
vi. 
Aviation Infrastructure Program 
• Reform Aviation Sector Policies and relevant Acts,   
• Carry out infrastructure rehabilitation at the main regional state airports, including 
rehabilitation of terminals,  
• Conduct feasibility study for a new international airport in Mogadishu, 
• Develop capacity and capability of regulatory and operators personnel, 
• Improve basic air navigation services and reconstruct the airport infrastructure to 
provide safe passenger and freight services to/from/via Somalia. 
• Establish the Somali Civil Aviation Authority (SCAA).  
• Finalize the activity concerning the re-establishment of the national carrier (Somali 
Airlines) 
 
 
vii. 
Energy and Water resources Service Expansion and Affordability Program 
• Rehabilitate vital state infrastructure such as key public institutions to enhance social 
service provision, 
• Establish hydro-meteorological Services institution under the ministry to observe and 
monitor weather, climate and River water levels and meet the needs of end uses.  
• Develop sustainable energy investment, water and sanitation policies, and national 
energy provision strategy, 
• Develop institutional capacity to regulate, operate and maintain energy, water and 
sanitation utility infrastructure and service provision, 
• Rehabilitate and expand energy, water and sanitation systems, 
• Expand access to clean energy (solar, wind, biogas) and reduce biomass based 
energy sources like fuel wood and charcoal,
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
• Undertake assessment and map renewable energy resources, incl. wind pattern maps 
to harness wind energy, and erect wind masts, 
• Map ground water resources to provide updated and more reliable data on aquifers, 
including aquifer delineation, monitoring and management to avoid over 
exploitation, 
• Support the development and implementation of Integrated Solid Waste Management 
Plans in cities and promote sustainable and regular solid waste management, develop 
respective legislation and implement pilot projects at municipal level.  
 
viii. 
ICT Program 
• Implement the developed ICT Policy and Strategy for Somalia that would incorporate 
a national broadband plan and an e-Government plan,  
• Operationalize the established independent ICT regulatory agency (National 
Communication Authority),  
• Establish the national backbone network, to connect the major cities, and federal 
member states, including through public private partnership (PPP) as appropriate, 
• Issue licenses for infrastructure-based telecommunication operators, and spectrum 
permits for mobile operators, with appropriate obligations, including taxation of 
telecom services, 
• Apply market mechanisms for spectrum management, including introducing a 
licensing process for 4G and 5G spectrum and a strategy for migration from analogue 
to digital broadcasting,  
• Introduce SIM card registration for all mobile devices, 
• Establish local loop network 
• Providing Backbone connectivity to Federal and Regional states 
• Establish X number of communication rooms at national and state level 
• License Media and Operators 
• Re-establish postal service throughout the country  
• Expansion of connection to secondary schools, technical institutes and vocational 
training institutions 
• eGovernment strategy and implementation to increase government revenues and 
facilitate service delivery 
• Establishment of integrated tech-based services offices (One-stop shops for public 
services from IDs, passports to Ministry of Commerce's business registration, etc).  
10. Aggregated Resources Requirement  
 (see table below on infrastructure programs)
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
11. Milestone of Infrastructure Sector development (2019-2023) 
 
• Infrastructure sector institutions capacities are strengthened (skilled human capacity injected, 
the necessary sub-institution, structures & legislation established, systems for prioritization 
of investment developed) and can lead the country’s infrastructure development progress, 
• Flagship programs in the infrastructure of each sector (e.g. ICT, transport, energy, livestock, 
agriculture, water & sanitation, housing and vital (state) government infrastructure) are 
initiated and/or under implementation.  
• Infrastructure strategy, master and investment plan is presented and leads to financial inflows 
to enable implementation and SITF is fully functional, including spatial plan for post NDP 
development programmes (2020-  ). 
 
2030 
 
2063 
12. Coordination aspects and requirements with other 
Sectors/activities/regions  
Inter-ministerial Infrastructure (Public Works) Coordination Mechanism (IMPWCM) consisting of 
Ministry of Public Works, Housing & Reconstruction, Ministry of Transport & Civil Aviation, 
Ministry of Ports & Marine Transport, Ministry of Energy & Water Resources, Ministry of Post 
&Telecommunication and the Environmental Agency of the Office of the Prime Minister will be 
the leading entity to guide development of policies, strategies, legislation and implement 
infrastructure programs. Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction & Housing is the lead ministry 
and is chairing the IMPWCM. IMPWCM will soon include regional state members, international 
development partners and interested investors. IMPWCM will function as a platform where the 
infrastructure development ideas will be raised, planned and executed. Ministry of Public Works 
will, in close cooperation with Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) and 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) be responsible for the coordination with the other sectors (e.g. 
productive sector, social sector, agriculture, fishery, industry & tourism), national and international 
stakeholders, donors and investors to discuss infrastructure development ideas and strategies to 
develop Somali infrastructure systems.  
There is also a need for inter-sectorial integrated infrastructure strategy to enhance economic 
growth and to increase nationwide economic development. The key ministry to coordinate the 
nationwide economic development programs and to combine sectorial strategies and program is the 
Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC). The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is 
responsible for ensuring that adequate financial resources will be available for the Main 
Infrastructure Development Programmes outlined above.
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
13. Conclusion  
(to be written once draft has been reviewed by all stakeholders)
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
14. Intervention Programmes 
 
Pillar 6: Infrastructure Sector Intervention Programmes 
Main 
Programs 
Outcomes 
Time Frame  
Actors Involved  
SDG 
Estimated 
Costs (USD) 
1. Institutional  
Capacity 
Building 
Program 
  
1.1 Regulatory framework for quality, 
reliable, sustainable and resilient 
infrastructure developed to support 
economic development and human well-
being, with a focus on affordable and 
equitable access for all  
2019-2023 
All infrastructure 
ministries 
 
SDG 9  
SDG 11 
9M 
1.2 Increased institutional capacities for 
quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient 
infrastructure developed to support 
economic development and human well-
being, with a focus on affordable and 
equitable access for all 
2019-2023 
All infrastructure 
ministries 
 
SDG 9  
SDG 11 
8.5M 
2. National 
Land, 
Physical 
Planning and 
Urban 
Solutions 
Program 
  
  
  
2.1 Inclusive and sustainable urbanization 
and capacity for participatory, integrated 
and human settlement planning and 
management 
Key activities under 2.1 
i) Strengthen institutional and technical 
capacities (human resource and technical 
skills) of national and regional planning 
institutions 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction 
SDG 11 
17.5M
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
  
  
ii) Develop national land and urban policies 
(with inclusion of climate change adaptation 
and mitigation and natural disaster planning) 
iii) Develop regional and urban strategic 
plans with special focus on urbanization and 
local economic development, and develop 
spatial strategic plans for all state capitals 
and other urban centers which guide city 
extension and other urban development 
plans:  
1. State capitals 
2. Mayor economic centers 
3. Refugee and returnee receiving cities 
 
iv) Develop and implement Urban 
Regulatory Frameworks for new states and 
for Mogadishu 
2.2 Increased land tenure security 
Key activities under 2.2: 
 
i) Road map for national public land 
inventory – to facilitate infrastructure system 
development drafted and aligned with 
ongoing activities in federal states and 
Mogadishu for state public property 
inventories 
 
ii) Work units established at Ministry of 
Public Works  at federal and state level and 
provided with capacity building trainings 
 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction 
SDG 11 
SDG 16 
13M
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
iii) Integration of eviction guidelines 
principles into the codes of conduct and 
manuals for the Ministry of Public Works, 
State Governments and Municipalities 
2.3 Vibrant construction sector utilizing 
local materials that responds to 
resilience/climate change issues 
Key activities under 2.3: 
i) Plan and undertake urban renewal/ 
reconstruction and expansion including 
rehabilitation of public space: 
1. State capitals 
2. Mayor economic centers 
3. Refugee and returnee receiving cities 
4. Other urban centers 
 
ii) Identify and promote suitable alternative 
construction techniques and a local building 
culture, which makes use of local raw 
materials and labour, is affordable and of low 
embodied energy, and spurs local economic 
development in the short and long term 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction  
SDG 11 
SDG 12 
SDG 13 
18M 
3. National 
Housing 
Program 
3.1 Improved access to adequate and 
affordable housing for the people of 
Somalia, in particular IDPs, refugees and 
returnees 
Key activities under 3.1 
i) Develop resettlement and integration 
solutions that are durable and at the same 
time upgrade conditions of temporary IDP 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction  
SDG 1 
SDG 11 
SDG 16 
19M
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
shelter to meet minimum living standards 
through participatory pilot projects 
 
ii) Develop National Urban Housing Sector 
Profile and National Housing Policy 
 
iii) Upgrade housing units and make them 
available to IDPs 
 
iv) Establish municipal housing programs 
(including rental subsidy programs or owner 
driven incremental reconstruction using 
micro-credits for purchase of building 
materials) 
3.2 Improved access to land for housing 
development 
i) Formulate clear legislation on land 
management and administration for 
public and private land that relate to the 
constitution currently in place 
ii) Develop provision for affirmative action 
regarding land concessions for housing 
purposes to IDPs IDP returnees and other 
vulnerable groups 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction 
SDG 11 
5M 
4. Roads 
Improvement 
Program 
  
  
  
4.1 Policies and regulatory frameworks to 
guide future roads maintenance, 
expansion and related service delivery 
 
Key activities under 4.1: 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Transport 
& Civil Aviation; 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction 
SDG 8  
SDG 9 
3.7M
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
  
i) Strengthen institutional and technical 
capacity to design, build and maintain 
roads 
ii) Develop policies and regulatory 
frameworks to guide future roads 
maintenance, expansion and related 
service delivery 
4.2 Rehabilitated and extended inter-state 
and inter-regional corridors 
 
Key activities under 4.2: 
i) Undertake road / transport corridors 
planning: 5M 
 
ii) Emergency maintenance program: (filling 
of pot holes/ resurfacing to make the 
roads traffic worthy till start of complete 
construction works) -15M 
 
iii) Rehabilitate and extend inter-state and 
inter-regional corridors: Total USD670M 
1. Mogadishu-Afgooye - Baidoa-Beled 
Hawo corridor : 229M 
2. Mogadishu- Balad -Jowhar - 
Beledweyne-Galkayo Corridor: 153M 
3. Mogadishu – Marka - Kismayo – Liboi 
Corridor (Kenya): 202M 
4. Berbera-Addis Ababa Corridor 
(Ethiopia): 65M 
5. Repair of road from Hobyo, Galkayo & 
Ethiopian border: 8M 
6. Completion Galkacayo-Galdogob 
 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction. 
Ministry of Transport 
& Civil Aviation;  
SDG 8  
SDG 9 
693M
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Road, feasibility/repair Galkacayo-
Gara’ad Road: 2M 
7. JALAM – XARFO section of the 
Garowe – Galkayo corridor: 6.7M 
8. Rehabilitation Hargeisa – Kalabydh 
Road: 4.5M 
 
iii) Create employment opportunities through 
labour-intensive approaches to roads 
rehabilitation/construction: 2M 
 
iv) Prioritize use of locally produced 
construction materials to enhance private 
sector development and employment 
creation: 1M 
 
 
4.3 Rehabilitate and construct urban 
roads 
 
Key activities under 4.3: 
i) Rehabilitate/ construct primary roads and 
bridges  
ii) Rehabilitate/ construct secondary roads 
iii) Strengthen institutional capacity of 
municipalities re road rehabilitation and 
construction 
2019-2023 
Municipalities 
SDG 8  
SDG 9 
32.5M 
5. Ports 
Upgrading 
Program 
  
5.1 Enhanced legislative and institutional 
framework and capacity facilitates  ports 
operations 
 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Ports and 
Marine Transport  
SDG 9 
SDG 14 
 6M
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
  
  
  
  
  
Key activities under 5.1: 
i) Establish Somali Maritime 
Administration/Authority 
ii) Conduct feasibility studies and technical 
assessments for planning future 
investments 
iii) Harmonize port charges as a source of 
government revenue and facilitate 
sustainable use by local exporters 
iv) Update Somali Merchant Shipping Act, 
prepare and ratify the new maritime code 
and localize International Conventions for 
shipping and seafarers 
5.2 Bottleneck of limited capacity of 
existing deep-sea ports removed 
 
Key activities under 5.2: 
i) Institutional strengthening of authorities 
responsible for managing different ports 
 
ii) Expand/ upgrade the existing deep-sea 
ports and develop strategy for  one new port, 
incl. rehabilitation of seamarks and 
lighthouses;  
1. Upgrade/ expand Mogadishu port  
2. Upgrade/ expand Kismayo port 
 
iii) Develop detailed Somalia Ports 
Development Strategy, update Somali 
Merchant Shipping Act, prepare and 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Ports and 
Marine Transport  
SDG 8 
SDG 9 
SDG 14 
30M
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
ratify the new maritime code and 
localize International Conventions for 
shipping and seafarers 
 
iv) Rehabilitate and expand existing cost 
barge berths  
v) Rehabilitation of lighthouses of Somali 
coastline  
6. Aviation 
Infrastructure 
Program 
6.1 Enhanced legislative and institutional 
framework and capacity facilitates  
airport operations 
 
Key activities under 6.1: 
i) Reform Aviation Sector Policies and 
relevant Acts 
ii) Develop capacity and capability of 
regulatory and operators personnel 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Transport 
& Civil Aviation 
SDG 8 
SDG 9 
10M 
6.2 Increased operational capacity of 
airports, improved operations and 
security 
 
Key activities under 6.2: 
 
i) 
Rehabilitate 8 main regional state 
airports, including rehabilitation of 
terminals and runways: 9M 
ii) 
Construction of the Mogadishu 
airport taxiway and rehabilitation of 
the runway 
iii) 
 Conduct feasibility study for a 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Transport 
& Civil Aviation 
SDG 9 
22M
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
new international airport in 
Mogadishu 
iv) 
Improve basic air navigation 
services and reconstruct the 
airport infrastructure to provide 
safe passenger and freight 
services to/from/via Somalia 
 
7. Energy and 
Water 
resources 
Service 
Expansion 
and 
Affordability 
Program 
  
  
  
  
  
7.1 Equitable access to safe and affordable 
drinking water 
 
Key activities under 7.1: 
 
i) 
Develop institutional capacity to 
regulate, operate and maintain the 
water sub-sectors utility 
infrastructure 
ii) 
Develop water policies and 
regulations 
iii) 
Rehabilitate and expand water 
systems: 
1. Establish a regulatory 
framework to guide public-
private-partnerships in water sub-
sector, including clarification on 
roles and responsibilities,  
2. Awareness campaigns to 
achieve behavioral change, 
 3. Municipal programs targeting 
the household level, 
iv) 
Establish hydro-meteorological 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction ; 
Ministry of Energy & 
Water Resources; 
Ministry of Health; 
municipalities; 
private sector 
SDG6 
62M
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
Services institution under the 
ministry to observe and monitor 
weather, climate and River water 
levels and meet the needs of end 
uses.  
v) 
Map ground water resources to 
provide updated and more reliable 
data on aquifers, including 
aquifer monitoring and 
management to avoid over 
exploitation 
vi) 
Stimulate and promote 
groundwater resources 
exploration and development of 
deep aquifers for pastoralist and 
agro-pastoralists  besides service 
water, rainwater harvesting as a 
supplement.  
 
7.2 Increased access to adequate and 
equitable sanitation 
 
Key activities under 7.2: 
 
i) Develop institutional capacity to regulate, 
operate and maintain the sanitation sub-
sectors utility infrastructure 
ii) Develop sanitation policies, regulations 
and strategies 
iii) Rehabilitate and expand sanitation 
systems: 
1. Establish a regulatory framework to 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction and 
line ministries; 
Ministry of Energy & 
Water Resources; 
Ministry of Health; 
municipalities; 
private sector 
SDG6 
SDG 11 
27M
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
guide public-private-partnerships in 
sanitation sub-sector, including 
clarification on roles and responsibilities 
2. Awareness campaigns to achieve 
behavioral change, 
3. Municipal programs targeting the 
household level 
iv) Support the development and 
implementation of Integrated Solid Waste 
Management Plans in cities and promote 
sustainable and regular solid waste 
management based on user fees, develop 
respective legislation and implement pilot 
projects targeting bio-medical waste, 
recycling, waste to energy transformation 
and public awareness raising campaigns. 
Scale up existing best practices from 
previous pilot projects and provide solid 
infrastructure systems for environmental 
friendly waste disposal and recycling. 
 
7.3 Ensure access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable and modern energy for all 
 
Key activities under 7.3: 
 
i) Develop institutional capacity to regulate, 
operate and maintain the energy sub-
sectors utility infrastructure 
ii) Develop sustainable energy investment 
policies and national energy provision 
strategy 
iii) Expand access to clean energy (solar, 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Energy & 
Water Resources; 
Ministry of Public 
Works, 
Reconstruction & 
Housing and line 
ministries; 
municipalities; 
private sector 
SDG 7  
SDG 9 
SDG12 
SDG13 
79M
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
wind, biogas) and reduce biomass based 
energy sources like fuel wood and 
charcoal: 
1. Increase efficiency of cooking systems, 
2. Extend renewable energy products and 
services for lighting and cooking,  
3. Vocational training programs for clean/ 
green energy, 
4. Municipal programs targeting the 
household level, 
5. Larger scale infrastructure investments 
for solar, wind and biogas plants, etc. (post 
2019) 
iv) Rehabilitate and expand energy systems: 
1. Awareness campaigns to achieve 
behavioral change, 
2. Promote decentralized energy systems, 
in particular mini grids 
3. Municipal programs targeting the 
household level 
v) Undertake assessment and map renewable 
energy resources, incl. wind pattern maps 
to harness wind energy 
 
7.4 Build quality, reliable, sustainable and 
resilient infrastructure to support 
economic development and human well-
being, with a focus on affordable and 
equitable service provision 
 
Key activities under 7.4: 
 
i) Establish a regulatory framework to guide 
2019-2023 
Ministry of Public 
Works, Housing and 
Reconstruction and 
line ministries;  
SDG11 
SDG16 
12.5M
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
public-private-partnerships for utility 
service provision including clarification on 
roles and responsibilities 
 
ii) Rehabilitate vital state infrastructure/ 
minimum 3 key public institutions to 
enhance social service provision: 7.5M 
 
8. ICT Sector 
Program 
  
  
  
  
8.1 Significantly increased access to 
information and communications technology 
 
Key activities under 8.1: 
i) Implement the developed ICT Policy and 
Strategy 
for 
Somalia 
that 
would 
incorporate a national broadband plan 
and an e-Government plan,  
ii) Operationalize the established  of an 
independent ICT regulatory authority 
(National Communications Authority),  
iii) Extend the national backbone network, 
to connect the major cities, and federal 
member states, including through public 
private partnership (PPP) as appropriate, 
iv) Issue licenses for infrastructure-based 
telecommunication 
operators, 
and 
spectrum permits for mobile operators, 
with appropriate obligations, including 
taxation of telecom services, 
2019-2023 
 Ministry of Post, 
Telecommunications 
& Technology  
SDG 9 
 70M???
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
Inter-ministerial Public Works Coordination Mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
October 2018 
v) Apply market mechanisms for spectrum 
management, including introducing a 
licensing process for 4G and 5G 
spectrum and a strategy for migration 
from analogue to digital broadcasting,  
vi) Introduce SIM card registration for all 
mobile devices, 
vii) Establish local loop network 
viii) Providing Backbone connectivity to 
Federal and Regional states 
ix) Establish X number communication 
rooms at national and state level 
x) License Media and Operators 
xi) Expansion of connection to secondary 
schools, technical institutes, vocational 
training institutions and universities.
