=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD3408  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR36.7 MILLION 
(US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND A PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$62 MILLION 
 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA   
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT II 
 
November 14, 2019 
 
 
 
Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
Exchange Rate Effective September 30, 2019 
 
Currency Unit =   SDR 
0.7335 = US$1 
US$ 1.3633 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: C. Felipe Jamarillo 
Senior Global Practice Director: Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
Practice Manager: Meskerem Brhane 
Task Team Leader(s): Zishan Faiza Karim, Makiko Watanabe
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
AFS 
Annual Financial Statements 
BRA 
Benadir Regional Administration 
CoC 
Code of Conduct 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DA 
Designated Account 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EHSG 
Environment Health and Safety Guidelines 
ESCP 
Environment and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environment and Social Framework 
ESIA 
Environment and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environment and Social Management Plan 
ESS 
Environment and Social Standard 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
FMS 
GBV 
GDP 
GRM 
Financial Management Information System 
Federal Member States 
Gender-Based Violence 
Gross Domestic Product 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFR 
Interim Unaudited Financial Report 
INT 
Integrity Vice Presidency 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
ISP 
Implementation Support Plan 
IT 
Information Technology 
JPLG 
UN Joint Program for Local Governance 
LMP 
M&E 
Labor Management Procedures 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MoPW 
Ministry of Public Works 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
OHS 
O&M 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Operations and Maintenance 
OP 
Operations Policy
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
 
 
 
PA 
Project Account 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PCU 
Project Coordination Unit 
PAP 
PDO 
Project Affected Persons 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPA 
PPP 
Public Procurement Concessions and Disposals Act 
Public Private Partnership 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
RAP 
Resettlement Action Plan 
RFB 
RPF 
SCF 
Request for Bids 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
Standard Conversion Factor 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SEF 
Stakeholder Engagement Framework 
SEA 
SEP 
SFF-LD 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
Special Financing for Local Development 
SH 
SoE 
Sexual Harassment 
Statement of Expenditures 
SORT 
Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SUIPP 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project 
SURP 
Somali Urban Resilience Project 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TIS + 
UCS 
UN 
WBG 
Transition Initiatives for Stabilization 
Use of Country Systems 
United Nations  
World Bank Group
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 9 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 9 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 10 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 14 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 15 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 15 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 15 
C. Project Cost and Financing ............................................................................................................. 22 
D. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 23 
E. Results Chain ................................................................................................................................... 23 
F. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ......................................................... 24 
G. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 24 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 25 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 25 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................................. 26 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 27 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 27 
A. 
Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................................. 27 
B. 
Technical Analysis ....................................................................................................................... 29 
C. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 30 
D. Legal Operational Policies .............................................................................................................. 31 
E. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 32 
F. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 33 
G. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 34 
H. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 38 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 47 
ANNEX 2: Gender Mainstreaming ................................................................................. 68
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
     
Page 1 of 72 
 
 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P170922 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
09-Dec-2019 
31-Dec-2024 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments and increase access to urban infrastructure and 
services in selected areas.
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 72  
     
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Urban Infrastructure and Services  
  89.00 
 
Institutional Strengthening and Analytics  
   5.00 
 
Project Management and Capacity Building  
  18.00 
 
Contingent Emergency Response  
   0.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Benadir Regional Administration  
 Kismayo Municipality/Jubbaland  
 Baidoa Municipality/South West State  
 Garowe Municipality/ Puntland  
 Ministry of Public Works  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
112.00 
Total Financing 
112.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
50.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
50.00 
          IDA Grant 
50.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
62.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
62.00
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 72  
     
 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
  50.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
National PBA 
  50.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
Total 
  50.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
   1.10 
   5.30 
   7.95 
  11.28 
  13.61 
  10.77 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
   1.10 
   6.40 
  14.35 
  25.62 
  39.23 
  50.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
Gender Tag 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of 
country gaps identified through SCD and CPF 
Yes 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or 
men's empowerment 
Yes 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
Yes
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 72  
     
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ High 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ High 
9. Other 
⚫ High 
10. Overall 
⚫ High 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 72  
     
 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.A.2 of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
FGS to establish within 30 days of effectiveness, and maintain throughout the implementation of the Project, a 
federal inter-ministerial Steering Committee responsible for providing strategic guidance for Project 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.A.3 (a) and (b) of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
FGS to establish by no later than 180 days from effectiveness, and maintain throughout the implementation of the 
Project, a Project Coordination Unit within the Federal Ministry of Public Works with the composition, mandate and 
resources satisfactory to the Association; the PCU is to be responsible for implementing Parts A.1.A.2, B and C of 
the Project.
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 72  
     
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.A.3 (c) of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
FGS to recruit to the PCU, within 180 days of effectiveness, the following staff: a program coordinator, an 
environmental and social safeguard specialist, a gender specialist, a procurement specialist, a finance specialist and 
a monitoring and evaluation specialist.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.A.4 (a) i and ii; I.A.4 (b) i and ii; I.A.4 (c) i and ii; I.A.4 (d) i and ii of the Schedules 2 to the Legal 
Agreements: 
The FGS to cause the participating FMS/BRA to maintain throughout implementation of the Project, Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs) with staffing and resources acceptable to the Bank, including a project coordinator, 
and financial management, procurement, environmental and social and monitoring and evaluation specialists, and 
an engineering under TORs acceptable to the Bank.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.A.4 (a) iii; IA4 (b) iii, IA4 (c) iii, IA4 (d) iii of Schedules 2 of the Legal Agreement: 
The Project Implementation Units will by no later than 180 days from effectiveness, recruit an engineering 
supervision consultant in accordance with the provisions of the Procurement Regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.B of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
The FGS and FMS to develop and adopt within 90 days of effectiveness, a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) in 
form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, and thereafter implement the Project in accordance with the PIM and 
the EAFS Manual. 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.C of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
The FGS to prepare by November 30 of each year and furnish to the Bank a consolidated annual program of 
activities for the following fiscal year together with the proposed budget and, after exchange of views with the 
Bank, carry out, and cause the FMS to carry out the Project activities in accordance with such program as agreed 
with the Bank.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.D of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
For purposes of carrying out Parts A(3) and C of the Project, the FGS shall make the proceeds of the grant/financing 
available to the participating FMS/BRA pursuant to subsidiary agreements entered under term and conditions 
approved by the Bank.
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 72  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Paras. 1 and 2 of Sections I.E of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements:  
FGS to ensure, and cause the participating FMS/BRA to ensure, that the Project is carried out in accordance with 
the Bank’s ESS, and the ESCP agreed with the Bank, providing sufficient funds to cover their implementation costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Paras 3 of Sections I.E of the Schedules 2 ot the Legal Agreements: 
FGS to: (a) prepare and compile, and cause the participating FMS/BRA to prepare, information reports on the status 
of compliance with the ESCP; and (b) inform the bank of nay incident or accident related to or having an impact on 
the Project (including incidents of GBV or cases of project-related child labor). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Paras. 4 of Sections I.E of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
FGS to maintain and publicize and cause the participating FMS/BRA to maintain and publicize the grievance 
mechanism for the Project in forma and substance satisfactory to the Bank.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.F of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreements: 
To ensure proper implementation of the contingency emergency response component (CERC), FGS to: (a) prepare 
and adopt a CERC Manual satisfactory to the Bank; (b) set up and maintain the institutional structures and 
arrangements set forth in the CERC Manual for implementation; (c) have declared an eligible crisis or emergency, 
and agreed with the Bank the activities to be implemented, prior to their implementation; and (d) prepare and 
disclosed all safeguard documents in accordance with the CERC Manual.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections III.C of the Schedules 2 to the Legal Agreement: 
The FGS to ensure that no funds shall be transferred/advanced out of the grants/financing to any participating FMS, 
or paid on behalf of such participating FMS out of the grants/financing, prior to such FMS having entered into a 
Subsidiary Agreement. Any such amounts to be deemed ineligible for financing.  
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The respective Subsidiary Agreements with at least two Participating Federal Member States
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 72  
     
 
(FMS) have been executed and delivered and are legally binding up on the Recipient and 
such Participating FMS in accordance with the respective terms of each such Subsidiary 
Agreement. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Somalia Multi Partner Fund Grant Agreement has been executed and delivered and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals 
under it (other than the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement) have been fulfilled. 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
Prior to disbursing any funds for the CERC, the FGS to: (i) determine that an eligible crisis has 
occurred and prepared an emergency response action plan outlining the activities to be 
included under this component; (ii) prepared and disclosed the respective instruments; (iii) 
appointed an entity responsible for implementation with adequate staff and resources; and 
(iv) adopted the respective CERC Manual.
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 72  
     
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Somalia is emerging from a legacy of two and half decades of cycles of violent conflict and 
fragility. Since 1991, the country has been fragmented by armed conflict, ad hoc regime change and 
state capture. The August 2012 peaceful transfer of power from a transitional to a full federal government 
in Mogadishu and the peaceful handover of power in 2017 to President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed 
Farmaajo generated domestic political momentum and triggered international recognition and support 
for the new federal government. Over the last four years, Somalia has taken encouraging steps towards a 
political settlement and the rehabilitation of government institutions. The creation of four new Federal 
Member States in southern Somalia and the reduced control by Al Shabaab in major tax bases such as 
Mogadishu and Kismayo, form the basis for a devolved/federal political settlement.1  
 
2. 
While the formation of the new Federal Member States (FMS) is a positive step towards 
reshaping the political economy, the federation process has been complex and challenging. The four 
new FMS in southern Somalia include Jubbaland, South West, Galmudug and Hirshabelle with Puntland 
in the north having been formed earlier in 1998.  Uncertainties however remain over the assignment of 
functions to different levels of government, pending a final constitutional settlement. There has been a 
deepening rift between the federal government and the FMS with the States declaring a suspension of 
formal ties with the center in September 2018 over concerns with resource and power allocations within 
Somalia’s federal structure. These tensions were exacerbated in the lead up to the elections in South West 
State in December 2018 with allegations of the federal government’s interference and with the elections 
in Jubbaland in August 2019. Relations between the federal government and the States will likely remain 
fluid for years to come, even as inter-government cooperation arrangements emerge.2  
 
3. 
Decades of conflict, compounded by recurring natural disasters have displaced a significant part 
of society and damaged much of the country’s infrastructure, resulting in high rates of poverty and food 
insecurity. Of the 12.3 million Somali population,3 an estimated 4.5 million are living on the margins of 
food insecurity.4 It is estimated that some one million Somalis currently reside in neighboring countries as 
refugees,5 and another 2.6 million are internally displaced.6 Poverty is estimated at approximately 49 
percent at the national level while the overall urban poverty rate stands at 45 percent; the poverty rate 
in Mogadishu is higher than the national average at 57 percent. Poverty is heavily concentrated in 
settlements of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) at 70 percent.7 The poor are also likely to experience 
non-monetary poverty with even worse access to basic services such as education, health, water and 
sanitation than the overall population.8  
                                            
1Al Shabaab does however retain control and continues to destabilize parts of southern Somalia, including in some urban areas.  
2 World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework for Somalia. August 2018. Report No. 12473-SO 
3 UNFPA (2014) http://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Population-Estimation-Survey-of-Somalia-PESS-2013-
2014.pdf 
4 FEWSNET – Somalia Food Assistance Fact Sheet. June 2019. UNOCHA Humanitarian Bulletin May 2019. 
5 UNHCR (2019). Situation of the Horn of Africa Somalia. May 31, 2019. 
6 UNOCHA (2019). “Humanitarian Bulletin May 2019.” May 2019. 
7 World Bank Group (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD). Report No. 123807-SO 
8 World Bank (2017). SCD.
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 72  
     
 
4. 
Somalia’s economy has proven remarkably resilient. Despite the perpetual civil conflict, the 
economy has grown at a moderate pace, averaging 2.2 percent real GDP growth from 2013-17. The 
economy rebounded in 2018 from the 2016/17 drought and sporadic terror attacks. Real GDP growth is 
estimated at 2.8 percent in 2018, up from 1.3 percent in 2017, mainly supported by recovering agricultural 
production, sustained consolidation of peace and security, gradual increase in private investment, and 
donor inflows. Sectors such as telecommunications, money transfer businesses, livestock exports, and 
localized electricity services remain key drivers of growth. With an estimated GDP per capita of US$342 in 
2018, Somalia remains one of the poorest countries in the world. 
 
5. 
The country’s fiscal situation has improved significantly, but resources for infrastructure and 
service delivery are limited. Domestic revenue collection increased, with total revenue growing by 19 
percent to US$293.8 million in 2018 compared to US$246.5 million in 2017. Domestic revenue recorded 
the highest growth of 29 percent while donor grants grew by six percent. This was driven by continued 
government efforts to broaden the tax base, enhance compliance, and improve collection capacity. Yet, 
the current FGS revenue levels, at about 3.8 percent of GDP, are inadequate to deliver meaningful services 
to citizens. Despite the remarkable improvement in domestic revenue mobilization, expenditure priorities 
remain unchanged. Almost all expenditure is recurrent and sector spending is skewed towards security 
and administrative services both accounting for 80 percent of the total spending hence crowding out 
social and economic sectors. The government still relies heavily on external assistance for socio-economic 
infrastructure and services.  
 
6. 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to current and future impacts of climate change given the high 
dependence of its population on livestock and agriculture. Approximately 70 percent of the population 
is engaged in agro-pastoralism, pastoralism and subsistence agriculture as livelihood options.9 Climate 
change vulnerability is compounded by the fact that the country is coastal, low lying, and impacted by 
conflict. Somalia generally experiences regular periods of droughts followed by flash floods and the 
intensity and frequency of these events have increased since 2007. The drought in 2016-2017 left 
approximately 6.7 million Somalis – more than half the population – in need of humanitarian assistance 
and displaced more than 926,000 people. The drought in 2019 has resulted in 3.4 million people with 
acute food insecurity and an additional 53,000 people have been displaced. Climate change impacts have 
resulted in increased numbers of the rural population migrating to urban centers, thereby greatly 
impacting the urban sector. It is therefore critical to support climate change adaptation measures in 
Somalia through more climate resilient infrastructure in cities.  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. 
Somalia’s urban population is growing rapidly as a result of changes in the pastoral and agro-
pastoral economy as well as significant forced migration into urban areas.  Rapid urbanization is driven 
by traditional economic rural-urban migration as well as decades of internal conflicts, insecurity, political 
turmoil and governance failures. This is compounded by cyclical environmental adversities such as 
drought and famine. In 2018, 858,000 people were internally displaced due to conflicts, floods and 
drought bringing the total number of displaced to an estimated 2.6 million people. Eighty percent of the 
total internally displaced live in urban areas (approximately 2.2 million) placing intensified pressure on 
                                            
9 UNDP, 2018.
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 72  
     
 
already limited urban infrastructure and services.10 The country has also witnessed a steady flow of 
returnees and refugees from neighboring countries with over 88,000 people voluntarily returning from 
twelve countries since 2014.11 The urban population is estimated at around 5.2 million (42 percent) with 
a growth rate of around 4 percent per annum.12 By 2040, the majority of Somali people will be living in 
urban areas. 
 
8. 
Urbanization is one of the most significant drivers of development and if managed well, can 
provide a pathway out of poverty and act as an engine of growth. High urban densities can reduce 
transaction costs, make public spending on infrastructure and services more economically viable, and act 
as an economic hub that attracts investments and talent. Investment in cities are also more visible to 
citizens and can help strengthen government legitimacy. If not managed well, however, urbanization can 
have perverse impacts such as congestion, reduced accessibility, inefficient or hazardous land use, 
increased social conflict and reduced economic efficiency among others.  
 
9. 
The stresses of urbanization on the already inadequate basic infrastructure and services are 
particularly severe in Mogadishu, Kismayo and Baidoa.  Decades of conflict and fragility has prevented 
any significant investment in infrastructure and services. Somali cities13 are characterized by poor access 
to clean water, proper sanitation and solid waste management leading to negative impacts on health and 
welfare of citizens as well as the economy.  Of the 21,830 km of roads in the country, it is estimated that 
only 2,860 km are paved (13 percent). There is minimal engineered storm water drainage infrastructure 
in urban areas in the absence of which natural streams and rivers act as the main drainage “sinks” with 
neighborhoods draining into these.14 Mogadishu is particularly impacted with a fast-growing population 
with over 500,000 informally settled or displaced people. The population of Baidoa in South West State is 
estimated to have tripled as those living in rural areas fled the 2017 drought - from 2016 to 2018, Baidoa 
received an estimated 349,000 displaced people.  Kismayo, in Jubbaland State, is under pressure from 
returning Somali refugees from the Dadaab camp in Kenya. An estimated 82,840 people returned from 
Kenya between 2015-2018, 64 percent of whom returning to Lower Juba region or Jubbaland. The growing 
population in these particular cities places considerable stress on municipal service delivery capacity and 
increases social tensions between host communities and the displaced.15 
 
10. 
The Government has limited capacity and resources to address basic service delivery and 
infrastructure challenges. District or municipal governments have the primary responsibility for providing 
basic services in Somalia, but capacity and fiscal constraints limit their ability to undertake basic municipal 
functions. Outside of a few larger cities, these constraints deepen rapidly. Sub-national governments are 
only receiving a small recurrent budget through an inter-governmental fiscal transfer, and staffing is 
generally skeletal with limited capacity. Municipal/district governments’ own source revenue collection is 
also minimal and unstructured. There is a high dependence on external assistance or the private sector 
for capital investments and delivery of services therefore tends to be ad hoc. 
 
                                            
10 UNOCHA (2019). “Humanitarian Bulletin May 2019.” May 2019. 
11 UNHCR, 2019. Refugee returnees to Somalia at 31 March 2019.  
12 UNFA (2014), https://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Population-Estimation-Survey-of-Somalia-PESS-2013-
2014.pdf 
13 This includes Mogadishu, Garowe and Hargeisa where a Rapid Urban Assessment was carried out.  
14 World Bank (2014). Rapid Assessment of Three Somali Cities.  
15 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 72  
     
 
11. 
As urban areas fail to keep pace with the rapid urbanization, Somalia’s cities are becoming more 
fragile, threatening the country’s stability. The rapid pace of urbanization has created multiple challenges 
for Somali cities. Cities have not been able to cope with the increased demands for land, housing, basic 
services, and jobs. As a result, cities are sprawling in an uncontrolled manner, slums are on the increase, 
and environmental degradation is accelerating. It is feared that large influxes of people may shift clan 
dynamics which can potentially destabilize the already fragile social structures.  Incidence of gender-based 
violence (GBV), among other protection concerns, is a prevalent issue in Somalia and a significant 
challenge confronting displaced populations in particular.16 IDPs face increased risks of GBV and sexual 
exploitation due to limited security in the IDP settlements, poor living conditions and limited clan 
protection. These are all contributing to increased fragility of Somali cities. Mogadishu, Merca and 
Kismayo have indeed been named the world’s three most fragile cities in the world.17 Urban fragility, 
particularly in the capital of Mogadishu, can have a profound impact on Somalia’s nascent stability. 
 
12. 
Addressing urban fragility requires a comprehensive resilience-based approach. Given cities play 
a central role in Somalia’s development and security, there is an acute need to strengthen their resilience. 
Urban resilience, under this project, is defined as “the municipal governments’ ability to prepare for, 
respond to, and adapt to shocks and stresses while continuing to provide critical services following an 
adverse event.” External shocks and stresses in the Somali context will include both natural disasters 
(including climate change impacts such as land degradation) and fragility.  
 
13. 
Urban resilience is understood as a holistic concept that comprises five composite dimensions 
- spatial, physical, economic, social, and institutional. Spatial resilience ensures flexibility in spatial plans, 
policies and land use management systems. Integration of IDP settlements into the urban fabric is an 
important aspect of spatial resilience in the Somali context. Physical resilience relates to ensuring urban 
infrastructure and service delivery meets the increased demands resulting from large influxes of people 
and that the infrastructure itself is climate resilient. Economic resilience is the city’s ability to manage and 
adapt to disruptions to the economic system, such as negative impacts on assets, production factors, and 
employment. Social resilience relates to strengthening social networks to cope and adapt to external 
stresses. Finally, institutional resilience relates to local government’s improved capacity to plan and 
manage the other dimensions of urban resilience.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
16 Several studies estimate that roughly three-quarters of survivors are IDPs. 
17 “These are the World’s Most Fragile Cities”. Urban Gateway. http://new.unhabitat.org/news/these-are-worlds-most-fragile-
cities.
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 72  
     
 
Figure 1. Urban Resilience Framework 
 
 
14. 
Building on the ongoing Somalia Urban Resilience Project (SURP), phase II aims to enhance the 
resilience of select cities with a particular focus on supporting physical resilience by financing investments 
in priority urban infrastructure. The project will also strengthen social resilience by fostering social 
cohesion and supporting infrastructure that benefits both host communities and the displaced, ensuring 
investments are prioritized through a participatory decision-making process.  Short-term income 
generation opportunities will be generated through the project for the vulnerable such as women, urban 
poor, IDPs and returnees. Institutional resilience will be supported through the strengthening of municipal 
governance, particularly by delivering infrastructure and services through sub-national government 
systems and helping to better define the respective roles and responsibilities over urban infrastructure 
and service delivery among the different levels of government.  Economic resilience will be supported by 
creating short-term income generation opportunities particularly for the urban poor and IDPs through 
labor-intensive works and exploring longer-term job opportunities for these groups by collaborating with 
the ongoing relevant livelihood, entrepreneurship and employment projects.18  
 
15. 
 Citizen engagement will be at the core of the project with communities engaged at all stages 
of project implementation. Firstly, the project will aim to address inequality and exclusion by focusing on 
infrastructure investments that help integrate the displaced population as well as the urban poor. 
Communities will be engaged and their feedback incorporated during the selection process for prioritized 
infrastructure, during implementation through their involvement in the selection of beneficiaries for short 
term labor opportunities and the Grievance Redress Mechanism; and finally for project maintenance. 
Further details are provided in the Project Description below.  
 
16. 
SURP II will seek to explore options for engaging women more proactively in project planning 
and implementation and particularly in the construction of infrastructure. Gender disparities in Somalia 
                                            
18 Possible projects to collaborate with include the World Bank-financed Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities 
(SCORE) (P152241) and SCALED-UP (P168115). 
Spatial Dimension
Social Dimension
Insitutional 
Dimension
Physical Dimension 
Economic Dimension 
Urban 
Resilience 
Urban planning 
Land use planning 
Hazard mapping 
Land inventory etc.  
Infra development 
Service delivery 
Land and housing 
Job creation 
Support for 
informal economy 
Biz regulations etc. 
Capacity dev. 
Accountability 
Inter-gov 
relations 
Social cohesion 
Participatory gov. 
Support to the 
vulnerable etc.
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 72  
     
 
are pronounced across most socio-economic and human development indicators. Although women are 
dynamic economic actors in Somali society, they are generally poorer than men and economic 
opportunities—for both women and men—remain limited.  Key project related gaps between males and 
females related to the project that have been identified include (i) the meaningful participation of women 
in community meetings related to subproject prioritization or implementation and (ii) involvement of 
women in the construction sector as both skilled and unskilled labor. According to the 2019 World Bank 
Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment, only 37 percent of women participate in the labor market, 
compared to 58 percent of men.  The 2019 National Employment Policy attributes the low levels of female 
participation in the labor market to “the patriarchal nature of society and customs which restrict the 
participation of women in a number of areas.” SURP II will therefore take explicit actions to ensure the 
engagement of women in project activities and measure progress on these actions through the project’s 
results framework. More details are provided in Annex 2 – Gender Mainstreaming.  
 
17. 
The ongoing Somali Urban Investment Planning Project (SUIPP), SURP and the proposed SURP 
II build on other ongoing projects supported by development partners. UN-Habitat’s work on urban 
planning and strategic spatial planning in Mogadishu and Baidoa, along with the Denmark-financed 
Kismayo urban development master plan provide useful city level information on existing land use, 
housing, IDPs, infrastructure and service delivery; urban plan that points to the future direction of city 
growth; and infrastructure/service requirements. SURP II will ensure that urban infrastructure 
investments are aligned with these urban plans. UN agencies’ Joint Program on Local Governance (JPLG) 
is helping to develop Local Government Laws at the FMS level, establishing democratically elected District 
Councils,19 improving municipalities’ own source revenue generation, property registration, Public 
Financial Management (PFM) and other administrative capacity support to municipal governments. SURP 
II will build on JPLG’s capacity building support and use their training modules where appropriate. USAID 
financed Transition Initiatives for Stabilization (TIS+) supports quick impact stabilization activities at the 
district and community levels.  In Mogadishu, the project utilized community institutions set up under 
TIS+ for consultations on priority roads. Finally, in Kismayo and Baidoa, the project will utilize the 
Community Action Groups established under the Joint UN agencies’ Midnimo project for participatory 
decision-making.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
18. 
The project contributes to the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and 
boosting shared prosperity through provision of much-needed economic infrastructure and basic services 
for some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people in one of the most fragile countries. The 
project also contributes to the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2019-22)20 
Focus Area 1 which aims to strengthen institutions to deliver services while addressing the cross-cutting 
consideration of building resilience to fragility and shocks. This project specifically aims to deliver on 
Strategic Objective 1.4 which aims to build the capacity of Somali municipalities for urban resilience.  
 
19. 
The project will also contribute to the Somalia National Development Plan (2017-2019) 
particularly for the Infrastructure Pillar that aims to “lay out the foundations of resilient infrastructure 
                                            
19 District Councils in turn elect the District Commissioner, who will serve as the de facto Mayor. 
20 Discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on August 29, 2018. Report No. 12473-SO
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 72  
     
 
systems that will contribute to the country’s stability and will provide necessary services for all”, as well 
as the Resilience Pillar that aims to “create opportunities for IDPs and refugee returnees to participate in 
public affairs and most importantly in decision-making pertaining to their own future, such as local and 
urban development processes” and to “systematically enhance the absorption capacity of basic services 
for IDPs and returning refugees”.21 
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments and increase access to urban infrastructure 
and services in selected areas. 
 
B. Project Components 
20. 
Building on SURP, the second phase has been designed as an urban resilience project that aims to 
deliver prioritized infrastructure in cities, use country PFM systems at the sub-national level and 
strengthen municipal government capacity.  SURP II will scale up investments within cities where the SURP 
is currently operational - Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa and lay the groundwork for expansion 
to cities in the States of Galmudug and Hirshabelle. The following four components are proposed for a 
duration of five years: (i) Urban Infrastructure and Services; (ii) Institutional Strengthening and Analytics; 
(iii) Project Management and Capacity Building; and (iv) Contingent Emergency Response. 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and Services (US$89 million, of which IDA US$37 million and 
Somalia MPF US$52 million)  
21. 
This component will support the preparation and implementation of all infrastructure 
investments in the project.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1: Preparatory Activities for Urban Infrastructure and Services in Existing Cities (US$5 
million, of which IDA US$3 million and Somalia MPF US$2 million) 
 
22. 
This subcomponent will finance consulting services for preparatory works required for civil works 
to be financed under SURP II in cities currently being supported under SURP/SUIPP.22  Eligible preparatory 
works include: (i) technical studies, engineering designs and bidding documents for priority investments; 
(ii) environment and social due diligence work; and (iii) any other necessary analytical work.  
 
23. 
During this preparatory phase, communities will be engaged in the prioritization of infrastructure 
investments to be financed by the project following a participatory decision- making process.  Community 
Engagement Officers (one male and one female) in the PIUs will facilitate this engagement and ensure 
                                            
21 Federal Government of Somalia (2017). “National Development Plan 2017 – 2019”.  
22 This will include the preparation of any additional feasibility studies, engineering designs, safeguard instruments, institutional 
assessments as well as other analytical work that may be required for Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 72  
     
 
that the voices of the vulnerable groups such as women, youth and IDPs are reflected.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2: Preparatory Activities for Urban Infrastructure and Services in New Cities (US$3 
million IDA) 
 
24. 
This subcomponent will finance consulting services for preparatory works required for civil works 
to be financed under SURP II in new cities23 that meet the project’s participation criteria.  Eligible 
preparatory works include: (i) technical studies, engineering designs and bidding documents for priority 
investments; (ii) environment and social due diligence work; (iii) institutional assessments of 
implementing agencies and (iii) any other necessary analytical work. This subcomponent will also finance 
the establishment and training of Project Implementation Units (PIUs). These studies will be contracted 
out following a competitive procurement process either by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the 
federal level or the respective municipalities/district governments depending on the capacity of the 
municipalities as determined by the institutional assessment.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3. Investment in Urban Infrastructure and Services (US$81 million; of which IDA 
US$31 million and Somalia MPF US$50 million) 
 
25. 
This sub-component will finance civil works, goods and construction supervision consultancies 
associated with the implementation of infrastructure investments in cities where the necessary 
implementation readiness criteria related are met, these criteria are outlined below.  
 
26. 
Infrastructure selection criteria. Eligible urban infrastructure investments need to meet the 
following criteria which interface the top-down citywide technical assessment with a bottom-up 
participatory decision-making process: 
 
• 
Critical investments that fill the existing urban infrastructure gaps as identified by local 
governments and citizens and verified in feasibility assessments.   
• 
Strategic investments that contribute to urban resilience. Investments aligned with a broader 
urban development plan and that directly contribute to making cities more resilient.  
• 
Inclusiveness. Investments that benefit vulnerable groups including women, youth, the poor, 
and the displaced and selected in a participatory manner.  
• 
Maximizing development impact.  Substantive investments should be prioritized over small 
scale/piece meal investments.  
• 
Coordination/complementarity with ongoing projects.  Investments should avoid overlap with 
ongoing development interventions but complement them.  
• 
Labor intensiveness. Investments should provide short term income generation opportunities 
for vulnerable groups.  
• 
Sustainability. Investments should build in operations and maintenance measures to ensure 
sustainability.  
                                            
23 These new cities would be from Galmudug and Hirshabelle States.
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 72  
     
 
• 
Climate Resilience. Investments should be climate resilient, in that they are planned, 
designed, built and operated in a way that anticipates, prepares for and adapts to changing 
climate conditions.  
• 
Government visibility. Investments should be visible to citizens and highlight the 
government’s role in implementation to strengthen their legitimacy. 
 
27. 
Funding allocation for infrastructure across participating cities will be determined through two 
sets of criteria – participation and implementation readiness criteria.  
• 
Participation Criteria. Cities would need to meet a set of participation criteria before they can be 
included in the SURP. 
o The city should be socio-economically important (e.g. Federal Member State capital, large 
influx of IDPs, economic hub, etc.) 
o The inclusion of the city in the SURP is formally endorsed by the Project Steering 
Committee and documented in the meeting minutes. 
 
• 
Implementation Readiness Criteria. Cities would need to meet the following implementation 
readiness criteria before being eligible for an infrastructure grant.  
o A PIU has been set up and is functional with necessary staffing.  
o The necessary technical studies for the priority investments have been prepared to a 
standard acceptable to the World Bank.  
o Any necessary safeguard documents24 have been prepared to a standard acceptable to 
the World Bank; consulted on with communities and local government officials and 
publicly disclosed.  
o There are no outstanding ineligible expenditures, any other fiduciary issues and/or 
safeguard issues with prior investments implemented by the respective city.  
 
28. 
Once the above implementation readiness criteria have been met, cities would be allocated 
funding for infrastructure investments in two installments.  
 
1st Installment: An initial installment totaling US$55 million would be divided among eligible cities based 
on the following procedures. 
 
• 
All cities meeting the implementation readiness criteria would receive an equal allocation or 
base grant of 50 percent of the total funds available for the initial installment.25 
• 
An allocation formula taking into account needs and vulnerability of the city would be applied to 
top up the above base grant. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
24 These include Environment Safeguard Management Frameworks and/or Plans, Resettlement Action Frameworks/and or 
Plans, Stakeholder Engagement Plan, Labour Management Procedures  
25 Total funding being allocated for the initial installment is US$55 million and the balance of US$26 million set aside for the 
second installment.
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 72  
     
 
Table 1. Budget Allocation Across Cities (US$) (50% Equal Allocation) 
City 
Meeting  
Readiness 
Criteria  
  
Population 
  
  
Equal 
Allocation  
(50%) 
  
Discretionary Allocation  
(50%) 
Total 
Weighted 
Allocation 
Vulnerability 
weight 
Vulnerability 
Weighted 
population 
Vulnerability 
Weighted 
population 
share 
Sub-total 
Mogadishu  
1,529,000 
6,875,000 
1.17 
     1,788,766  
67% 
18,432,705 
25,307,704 
Kismayo 
198,000 
6,875,000 
1.03 
         204,418  
8% 
2,106,469 
8,981,469 
Baidoa  
423,000 
6,875,000 
1.50 
         634,500  
24% 
6,538,334 
13,413,334 
Garowe  
82,000 
6,875,000 
0.50 
           41,000  
2% 
422,493 
7,297,493 
Total  
  
27,500,000 
  
     2,668,685  
  
27,500,000 
55,000,000 
 
2nd Installment: A second installment would be provided to cities that are able to fully utilize their first 
installment successfully.  
 
29. 
The balance of US$26 million will be provided to cities that are able to successfully commit their 
initial allocation fully and disburse at least 50 percent of their allocation. This US$26 million will be divided 
among all cities meeting these criteria. Newly participating cities will also be eligible for the second 
tranche subject to meeting the implementation readiness criteria. Allocations for the second installment 
will be determined in the second year of project implementation in consultation with the Steering 
Committee and PIUs.  
 
30. 
The exact infrastructure investments in individual subprojects will be determined during project 
implementation. However, based on consultations with relevant stakeholders and technical 
assessments26, priority investments are likely to include: (i) upgrading/rehabilitation of existing urban 
roads and community roads; (ii) drainage; (iii) pedestrian walkways; (iv) streetlighting; and (v) bridges.  
Investments in roads are justifiable in that provision of basic services such as water and electricity are fully 
privatized in Somalia whereas private sector is unlikely to invest in roads, which are public goods.27 While 
the final list of infrastructure investments are not known across the four cities, there are some 
investments in Mogadishu and Garowe which can possibly be considered “quick win” subprojects as they 
have feasibility studies and preliminary designs already prepared and can be implemented as the first 
batch of subprojects under SURP II.28 City-specific eligible infrastructure investments include the 
following.29  
 
31. 
Benadir Regional Administration (BRA)/Mogadishu: The construction of 11km of community 
roads in 10 districts of Mogadishu,30 and one urban road (Jaal Siyaad) about 3.7km has been prioritized as 
                                            
26 Technical assessments include: urban assessments and feasibility studies undertaken in Kismayo, Baidoa, Garowe and 
Mogadishu, as well as the Road Inter-connectivity and Drainage Masterplan in Mogadishu.  
27 Future phases of the project can however support improvements in basic service delivery if this is a priority of the 
Government.  
28 These potential ‘quick win’ candidate investments amount to approximately US$10 million.  
29 See section C for more details on the implementation readiness criteria 
30 19 community roads, a total of 7.5km in 7 districts of Mogadishu are being financed under the ongoing SURP. The community
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 72  
     
 
possible “quick win” candidate subprojects.  Feasibility studies and preliminary designs for these roads 
have been completed under SUIPP and the community roads were selected through engagement with 
communities. To ensure proper road network and interconnectivity of the disjointed community roads 
within the city, BRA has also prioritized construction of additional 15.2km of interconnectivity roads. The 
preparation of feasibility studies, designs and bidding documents for these additional roads would need 
to be carried out under SURP II. Due to the perennial flooding problem in Mogadishu, BRA is also keen to 
implement the first phase of the Drainage Masterplan prepared through Bank support in December 2018 
which would include the rehabilitation and construction of 6.5km of drainage.  
 
32. 
Garowe: The construction of four urban roads31 have been prioritized as “quick win” candidate 
subprojects and feasibility studies and preliminary designs have been completed for the roads under 
SUIPP. These roads will serve areas where IDPs are living, the main Garowe hospital, and other social 
facilities. A multi-criteria analysis (MCA) was used in prioritizing and ranking these roads using indicators 
such as road condition, traffic volume, access to socio-economic facilities, environmental and social 
impacts, and government/community priorities.  A hospital bridge has also been prioritized but this still 
requires engineering designs. This subproject will therefore be included in the second batch infrastructure 
investments.  
 
33. 
Kismayo: Under SUIPP AF, feasibility studies and detailed designs for priority roads in Kismayo are 
being prepared. Sixteen road sections totaling 32km have been prioritized based on MCA. The analysis 
examined various indicators which included: road condition, traffic volume, number of beneficiaries, 
access to socio-economic facilities, benefits to IDPs, environmental and social impacts, and 
government/community priorities. Furthermore, roads that were identified as priority roads in the urban 
plan and those that link with other development partners’ investments were prioritized.  About 10 – 15km 
of prioritized roads depending on available funding can potentially be funded under SURP II. There are no 
“quick win” projects in Kismayo.  
 
34. 
Baidoa: SUIPP AF is preparing feasibility studies and detailed designs for priority roads in Baidoa. 
Eight road sections of about 22km have been prioritized based on MCA as explained above. Given that 
Baidoa’s population has almost tripled with the recent influx of IDPs, roads that contribute to the new IDP 
resettlement area and existing IDP settlements were given high priority. Furthermore, considerations 
have been given to ensure that SURP II financed roads are well aligned with the city’s urban development 
plan and that they leverage other development partner funded roads to ensure inter-connectivity.  About 
10 – 15km depending on available funding can potentially be funded under SURP II. There are no “quick 
win” projects in Baidoa.  
 
35. 
Community members would be engaged, through community engagement officers, during 
implementation of the civil works to: (i) identify beneficiaries for wage labor opportunities based on an 
agreed set of selection criteria and ensure women, IDPs and other vulnerable groups are given priority; 
and (ii) monitor the adherence to these criteria throughout construction. In addition, community 
operations and maintenance (O&M) committees will be established and trained in order to support 
municipalities with O&M of the project financed roads. In order to ensure women’s views are 
                                            
roads will be constructed with interlocking concrete block pavers, similar to the ongoing works, while asphaltic concrete 
pavement is proposed for the urban road.   
31 Gambol, Wadajir, Tawfig, and 30 KA Road
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 72  
     
 
incorporated into subproject prioritization process and the operations and maintenance aspects, separate 
meetings will be held with women’s groups. A female Community Engagement Officer will be hired to 
facilitate this process and guidelines will be developed to facilitate women’s recruitment and retention. 
These guidelines will further include provisions to protect against potential risks, including risk of sexual 
harassment, exploitation or abuse in the hiring process. In addition, contract packages across all four cities 
will be divided to ensure they are small enough to give opportunities to local firms to bid who would be 
more likely to employ local labor.  
 
36. 
Female skilled labor will be engaged in the project by exploring partnerships with other 
development partner initiatives that are providing vocational training to women such as UNHABITAT and 
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) support to the Ministry of Public Works. An increase 
in the numbers of women engaged in unskilled labor will be facilitated through the provision of adequate, 
separate and safe toilet facilities, safe transport for women to the construction site; female only 
construction groups will be formed if feasible. Additional provisions to ensure women’s access, safety and 
security will be developed in advance of the recruitment process. Given the urban focus, there is a greater 
chance of attracting women as both skilled and unskilled labor in the project. The outcome of these 
initiatives (successes and failures) will be documented by the PCU in a lessons learned note which can 
feed back into the project to improve the mainstreaming of gender in implementation.  
 
37. 
The proposed project will have substantial climate change adaptation and mitigation co-benefits. 
All urban infrastructure will be designed and constructed considering the changing climate conditions, 
thus ensuring connectivity and enabling communities to recover more rapidly to disruptions caused by 
climatic conditions. In the dry seasons (which account for a cumulative period of nine months every year, 
on average), the paved surface will reduce the risk of dust vortexes and its consequences on the 
population. Since the project locations are susceptible to high temperature fluctuations and occasional 
flooding due to torrential rainfall, which is expected to increase in frequency and intensity due to climate 
change, improved drainage infrastructure will provide climate change adaptation benefits during the two 
annual rainy seasons. Pedestrian walkways will provide climate change mitigation co-benefits, as this will 
support urban transport modal change and pedestrian mobility, resulting in reduction of emissions from 
vehicular traffic. Finally, the project will also include energy-efficient street lighting, which has significant 
climate mitigation co-benefits. 
 
38. 
This sub-component will also finance construction supervision consultancies to be procured by 
the respective municipal governments. The supervision consulting firm(s) will assist the municipal 
governments to effectively supervise investment subprojects and to transfer skills to technical staff. 
Support will also be provided to assist the municipal governments in the implementation and monitoring 
of safeguards. 
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics (US$5 million, of which IDA US$3 million and 
Somalia MPF US$2 million)  
 
39. 
This component will support various thematic TA and related analytics which include but are not 
limited to the following:
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 72  
     
 
• 
TA on Informal Settlements – Municipal governments will be supported in identifying pathways to 
formalize informal settlements in situ to the extent possible through a range of interim tenure 
arrangements for different types of informal settlements. Due to lack of secure tenure, many of the 
IDPs in Mogadishu32 face secondary displacement in the form of forced eviction.33 In the absence of 
clear laws to regulate land transactions or policies to protect informal settlers, the number of illegal 
evictions is likely to continue to rise. To date, the government has applied a one-size-fits-all approach 
aiming to resettle all IDPs to city peripheries, which is expensive and should be treated as a last resort. 
By distinguishing different types of informal settlements (based on location and types of inhabitants) 
and identifying tailored solutions, this TA will help optimize the interim tenure options. This TA will be 
undertaken in Mogadishu, as the city has the government’s strong political will. The proposed TA will 
build on the World Bank’s ongoing Somalia Urbanization Review as well as a joint UN study on 
sustainable IDP durable solutions. Close coordination will be required with various partners engaged 
in land and housing issues such as the UN Regional Coordinator’s Office, International Office for 
Migration, UN-Habitat, and Norwegian Refugee Council among others.  
 
• 
TA on Urban Infrastructure O&M –The technical and financial aspects of O&M for municipal road 
assets will be supported, starting with Mogadishu as a pilot. Specifically, the TA will help: (i) examine 
the status quo of major urban roads in Mogadishu and construct a road network inventory and 
condition database; (ii) examine BRA’s current budget and expenditures on road O&M and estimate 
the financing gap; (iii) review and update the Mogadishu road maintenance plan prepared by BRA 
with innovative financing and technical measures utilizing various financing sources such as the 
private sector, diaspora, communities, and the government; and (iv) ensure that the consideration of 
climate change impacts in the O&M of infrastructure, such as changing maintenance schedules and 
including adaptive management to account for uncertainty in the future. This TA builds on the first 
phase of the TA that is currently being implemented in Mogadishu under SURP. Should the pilot prove 
successful, the TA will be scaled up to other target cities.  
 
• 
TA on Urban Governance and Services –Taking solid waste management as an entry point, this TA 
will help strengthen the local government’s ability to hold private service providers accountable in 
urban service delivery. Specifically, this TA will finance: (i) diagnostic work to analyze the current solid 
waste management system in Mogadishu and identify key challenges and means to tackle them; and 
(ii) pilot activities to improve waste disposal and collection in project supported areas. Unlike other 
service delivery sectors, solid waste management is managed by the municipal government by 
contracting private operators for waste collection and is therefore a good entry point.34 The benefits 
of helping the local government improve solid waste management are manifold: (i) better solid waste 
management helps maintain SURP II roads and side drainage; (ii) strengthening the local 
government’s capacity to monitor and hold private service providers accountable can strengthen 
urban governance and service provision; (iii) improving a highly visible problem can help enhance local 
                                            
32 Mogadishu is home to an estimated 600,000 IDPs most of whom live in informal settlements while Baidoa hosts an estimated 
323,000 IDPs32 and based on the available cities’ population estimate, IDPs account for 39 percent and 76 percent of 
Mogadishu and Baidoa’s population respectively. 
33 Between January and July 2018 alone, over 204,000 IDPs were forcibly evicted across the country, more than half of which 
were in Mogadishu. 
34 Other urban services such as water supply and electricity are currently provided by the private sector who have no contractual 
obligations to the municipal government.
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 72  
     
 
government legitimacy; and (iv) can reduce health and environmental risks. In addition, to further the 
overall discussion of inter-governmental functional assignments pertaining to urban governance and 
services, the establishment of a “Mayors’ Forum” will be supported. This TA will be undertaken in 
close collaboration with the UN Joint Program for Local Governance (UN JPLG) given the program’s 
continued support to sub-national governance system strengthening.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (US$18 million, of which IDA US$10 million 
and Somalia MPF US$8 million)35  
 
40. 
This component will finance the overall project management costs (including monitoring and 
evaluation) as well as the capacity building of the PCU, PIUs and relevant municipal staff. Specifically, this 
component will finance: costs related to staffing of a PCU located in the Ministry of Public Works (MoPW) 
as well as the PIUs at the municipal level in Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa; financial audits; 
grievance redress and feedback mechanism (GRM), social and environmental safeguard implementation, 
M&E including a geo-enabled monitoring system (GEMS) and impact evaluation. Third-party monitoring 
for the supervision of civil works and verification of project implementation progress will be undertaken 
by the World Bank through Somalia MPF funding.  
 
41. 
Capacity building in engineering, FM, procurement, environment/social safeguards, planning and 
budgeting, M&E, citizen engagement and any other capacities necessary will be provided to the PCU, PIU 
and municipal staff. The contents of the capacity building will build on the institutional assessments of the 
municipalities and will be provided through either a TA firm or Individual Consultants as deemed 
appropriate. The TA will use on-the-job mentoring and classroom training.  
 
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0m)  
 
42. 
This contingent emergency response component (CERC) would be included under the project in 
accordance with the World Bank Policy on Investment Project Financing dated September 30, 2018, 
Paragraph 12 and 13 for situations of urgent need of assistance. This will allow for rapid reallocation of 
uncommitted project funds in the event of a natural or man-made crisis in the future, during the 
implementation of the project, to address eligible emergency needs under the conditions established in 
its operations manual. This component will have no funding allocation initially and will draw resources 
from the other expenditure categories at the time of activation.36  
 
C. Project Cost and Financing 
 
43. 
The proposed project has an overall financing envelope of US$112 million from the Somalia MPF 
(US$62 million) and IDA (US$50 million). The project will be implemented over a period of five years. The 
                                            
35 The costs allocated for this component are significant given the high costs of operating in Somalia – costs related to monitoring 
and evaluation, safeguards implementation and monitoring as well as community engagement for example are expected to be 
high. These costs were estimated based on the costs of the ongoing SURP.   
36 If an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) is established, this component will serve as an IRM CERC to allow the reallocation 
of uncommitted funds from the project portfolio to the IRM Designated Account (DA) to address emergency response and 
recovery costs, if approved by the World Bank.
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 72  
     
 
proposed costs across project components are outlined in the cost table below.  
 
44. 
The SURP II provides for retroactive financing of US$1,200,000 equivalent to cover expenses 
related to the preparation of detailed designs, bidding documents and site-specific safeguard documents 
for “quick win” subprojects in Mogadishu and Garowe from July 1, 2019 until project effectiveness. 
 
Table 2. Project Cost Table  
Project Components 
Project cost 
Project Financing 
(US$ millions) 
% Financing 
1. Urban Infrastructure 
Services 
2. Institutional Strengthening 
and Analytics 
3. Project Management and 
Capacity Building 
4. CERC 
89.00* 
5.00 
18.00 
0.00 
89.00 
5.00 
18.00 
0.00 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Total Costs 
 
 
 
Total Project Costs 
112.00 
 
 
Total Financing Required 
112.00 
 
100% 
*The US$89 million includes US$8 million for technical studies for urban infrastructure.  
 
D. Project Beneficiaries 
 
45. 
The immediate project beneficiaries will be the residents of BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa as 
well as residents in the States of Galmudug and Hirshabelle.  This includes those affected by forced 
displacement (i.e. IDPs, returnees, and host communities) where the infrastructure investments are being 
implemented. In addition, approximately 530 people in BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa will benefit 
from short-term income generation opportunities resulting from the civil works. Finally, the BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and Baidoa Municipality staff will benefit from capacity building initiatives in this project. Once 
cities have been selected in Galmudug and Hirshabelle, those municipalities will also benefit from capacity 
building initiatives.  
 
E. Results Chain  
 
46. 
The theory of change underlying the proposed project interventions is that supporting municipal 
government capacity and delivering community prioritized urban infrastructure would support the 
Government’s efforts to demonstrate visible and tangible improvements in the lives of its citizens in the 
longer term. This is critical for strengthening the legitimacy of the government and sustaining social and 
political stability in the country. In the context of Somalia however, the theory of change outlined below 
would be non-linear and iterative in nature.
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 72  
     
 
 
 
 
F. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
47. 
In a context where the bulk of Somalia’s Official Development Assistance Budget (ODA) is 
provided outside government systems, the World Bank has a significant role to play in strengthening 
government institutions and helping to bring the ODA on budget.  Somalia is highly aid dependent with 
ODA growing in the last decade from around US$400 million in 2006 to US$1.75 billion in 2017.  This is 
driven largely by the humanitarian response to the drought. Through this project, the World Bank would 
be strengthening local government institutions and their ability to serve as a platform for the delivery of 
infrastructure and services to their citizens in the longer term. This project is expected to catalyze 
additional donor funding to be channeled on-treasury to FMS and municipalities/districts to the delivery 
of urban infrastructure and services. 
 
G. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
48. 
Use of government systems helps strengthen local governments. Putting local government in 
the driver’s seat is particularly important in urban areas where municipal governments have the primary 
responsibility for infrastructure and service delivery. This project is the first attempt to use government 
PFM systems at the sub-national level in Somalia with the aim of helping to build their capacities and fulfill 
their mandate. While such an approach poses significant risks, successful implementation of this model 
can help municipalities leverage more assistance from other development partners in the future to meet 
the vast and growing development needs in cities.  
 
49. 
Mitigation of the potential negative spillover effects of urban infrastructure upgrading such as 
induced forced eviction of the IDPs is critically important. Forced eviction of IDPs, who have fled from 
drought and violence and settled on idle private or public lands in Somali cities is rampant especially in
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 72  
     
 
urban centers such as Mogadishu where land is scarce and land values are high. Between January and July 
2018, over 204,000 people were evicted without any prior notice or due process. Any urban investments 
will result in increased land values, which can trigger displacement and further impoverish the already 
vulnerable IDPs. To help mitigate such potential risks, it is important to build in collaboration with relevant 
partners and measures to provide more security of tenure for the vulnerable IDPs. A specific TA has 
therefore been included in SURP II.  
 
50. 
Measures for sustainable O&M for project supported assets need to be built into the project 
design from the outset. Both national and sub-national governments in Fragile, Conflict and Violence 
(FCV) affected countries such as Somalia rarely have funds to properly maintain assets. It is therefore 
essential to identify innovative ways to ensure sustainability of the assets such as mobilizing resources 
from the community and the private sector and ensure that the government has a system to monitor and 
budget for the O&M needs. SURP II will finance a specific TA to support municipalities in ensuring proper 
O&M of urban infrastructure assets.  
 
51. 
Ensuring inclusivity of all levels of government and relevant institutions requires that additional 
time be budgeted in the project timetable. As Somalia’s political institutions are still in their infancy, there 
can be ambiguity in the division of labor across different levels of government as well as across different 
agencies. Ensuring that all levels of government and relevant agencies are involved in the project planning 
and oversight in a constructive manner can therefore be a time-consuming process. The project 
implementation timetable and workplan should therefore allocate sufficient time for key activities such 
as recruitment of PIU staff, bid evaluation, and implementation of safeguard measures.  
 
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
52. 
The proposed SURP II will be implemented on behalf of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
by the BRA, Garowe Municipality, Kismayo Municipality and Baidoa Municipality. New cities in Galmudug 
and Hirshabelle States will also be implementing entities in the project.  The Grant Agreement/Legal 
Agreement will be signed between the World Bank and the Ministry of Finance at the federal level, 
whereas each state will sign a subsidiary agreement with the Federal Government. The Federal 
Government will have oversight of the project.  
 
53. 
Federal-level roles and responsibilities.  A federal inter-ministerial Steering Committee chaired 
by the Office of the Prime Minister and the Aid Coordination Unit will be set up and would meet on a 
quarterly basis or more frequently as needed. Other key line ministries such as the Ministry of Planning, 
Investment and Economic Development (MoPIED), MoPW, and the Ministry of Finance will also be 
represented. This Steering Committee will also include one representative from each Federal Member 
State participating in the project.37 The Steering Committee will be responsible for providing strategic 
guidance to the project, approving the inclusion of additional cities into the project and deciding on the 
                                            
37 The Mayor of Mogadishu would represent the Benadir Regional Administration and the Ministries of Public Works would 
represent the other FMS.
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 72  
     
 
funding allocations across cities. Detailed terms of reference will be developed for the steering committee 
to outline the composition, roles and responsibilities and procedures for decision making.  
 
54. 
A PCU will be set up at the federal level in the MoPW staffed with a Program Coordinator, FM 
Specialist, Procurement Specialist, Environment/Social Safeguards Specialist, Gender Specialist, M&E 
Specialist and other technical staff as needed.  The PCU will be responsible for providing coordination and 
technical support to the municipalities as needed. The PCU will not manage the project funds related to 
implementation of the civil works. The Program Coordinator will act as the Secretariat to the Steering 
Committee. Other roles of the Program Coordinator are described in Annex 1: Implementation 
Arrangements and Support Plan.  
 
55. 
State- level roles and responsibilities. State level inter-ministerial committees would be set up to 
provide a platform for coordination, information dissemination and consultation at the State level. These 
committees would include the Ministries of Public Works, Planning, Finance and Interior as well as the 
Mayors of the cities benefiting from the project.  These committees have already been established in 
Jubbaland and South West State but will need to be established in Puntland, Galmudug and Hirshabelle. 
Given there will already be a federal level steering committee, an additional committee for BRA will not 
be required. Subsidiary Agreements will be prepared and negotiated for each State to clearly outline the 
roles and responsibilities of the State vis a vis the federal level.  
 
56. 
Municipal- level roles and responsibilities. The BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa Municipalities 
will have overall responsibility for project implementation. PIUs have already been established within the 
BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa Municipalities who report to the respective Mayors. They are staffed 
with a Project Focal Point/Coordinators, Procurement Specialists, FM Specialists, Project Engineers, 
Environment and Social Safeguard Specialists and M&E Specialists. Community Engagement Officers 
(male and female) will be recruited. PIUs will: coordinate overall project implementation; ensure timely 
payments to contractors, implement the relevant safeguard instruments, ensure continuous community 
outreach and consultation, maintain project accounts and produce financial reports, undertake M&E 
activities, develop and implement the GRM and report results to various stakeholders. Once Galmudug 
and Hirshabelle enter the program, PIUs will be established in these cities. PIUs’ capacity will be 
continuously strengthened by the World Bank technical staff.  
 
57. 
The PIUs will be supported by an engineering supervision consultant(s) who will be responsible 
for monitoring the civil works contractors as well as monitoring adherence to the safeguard instruments. 
A third-party monitoring agent will be contracted by the World Bank to provide quality assurance - carry 
out spot checks on both the engineering quality of the civil works and adherence to the safeguard 
instruments.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
58. 
A project monitoring system has been established by the PIUs to assess progress on indicators in 
the projects results framework.  Data on activities and outputs will be included in regular monthly and 
quarterly reports prepared by the PIUs based on inputs from the supervision agent and the Project 
Engineer. The M&E Specialist at the PCU will be responsible for collating the data from the municipalities 
and providing quality assurance.
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 72  
     
 
 
59. 
An impact evaluation will be carried out across all four cities to measure the socio-economic 
impacts of the project on different population groups with a particular focus on benefits for the vulnerable 
people. The evaluation will include both quantitative and qualitative surveys. This will be complemented 
by a continuous iterative beneficiary monitoring and regular social audit to allow the project to adjust the 
implementation approach on a real-time basis.  
 
C. Sustainability 
 
60. 
The SURP II is building on the ongoing SURP and is supporting the longer-term relationship 
between enhanced municipal institutional capacity, municipal planning and improved service delivery. 
The project will also be supporting the development of improved O&M plans across all four cities where 
road and drainage infrastructure is being financed. These plans will factor in the available municipal 
budget as well as financing needs for maintenance of existing infrastructure assets. In addition, the type 
of surfacing selected for urban roads supported under this project would be surfacing that can be easily 
maintained by the communities themselves with minimal support from the respective municipalities. 
Maintenance committees composed of community members would be set up for all project supported 
roads and these committees would be responsible for informing the municipalities of maintenance needs 
and mobilizing community members for maintenance work as needed. These committees would be 
trained under the project by the respective municipality and engineering supervision consultant.  
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis  
 
61. 
The following assumptions were made for the economic analysis:  
 
• 
Valuation of costs and benefits: based on market and shadow prices, with a Standard Conversion 
Factor (SCF) of 0.85 applied to capital, and operations and maintenance, to account for market 
price imperfections;  
• 
The capital cost of the project is assumed to be incurred in the first two years of the project, and 
the operations and maintenance cost are assumed to be equivalent to 4 percent of the capital 
cost of the project adjusted by the SCF; 
• 
Appraisal period: a 15-year appraisal period is selected; and 
• 
Discount rate: a 12 percent discount rate is applied. 
 
62. 
The economic analysis conducted as part of the project preparation process suggests that the 
proposed interventions under sub-component 1.2 are economically feasible, with the net present value 
(NPV) of the project being positive and the economic internal rate of return of the project being largely in 
excess of the discount rate of 12 percent that is assumed. The stream of benefits derived from this project 
consists of the: (i) value of greater access to public services; (ii) value of time saved commuting; and (iii) 
value of greater economic integration of relatively isolated areas.  
 
63. 
The benefits of the project are estimated based on the daily traffic growth over the life of the
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 72  
     
 
project applied on the daily traffic estimates for 2020. Table 3 presents the daily traffic volume for all four 
cities in 2020. 
 
Table 3. Daily Traffic Estimates for Road Interventions  
  
Daily Traffic Volume  
Cars and Utilities 
Trucks 
Buses 
Mogadishu  
6,842 
2,795 
5,624 
Garowe  
10,526 
4,530 
3,193 
Baidoa 
10,526 
3,193 
4,530 
 
Source: Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II, Engineering Feasibility Studies for Mogadishu, Garowe 
and Baidoa. 
 
64. 
For the city of Mogadishu, the results of the economic analysis suggest an NPV of US$50 million 
and an IRR of 49 percent. For the city of Garowe, the NPV is estimated at US$67 million and the IRR is 
estimated at 218 percent.  For the city of Baidoa, the NPV is estimated at US$61 million and the IRR is 
estimated at 106 percent. (Table 4). 
 
65. 
The sensitivity analysis performed indicates that the economic rate of return for interventions 
would remain significant in the event of potential downside adjustments to the economic assumptions 
relied on for the economic analysis (Table 4).  
 
Table 4. Sensitivity Analysis of Cost-benefit Analysis of Road Interventions 
Alternative Scenarios 
NPV 
IRR 
Mogadishu 
Without sensitivity analysis 
$50,403,498  
49% 
Costs increase by 10 percent 
$47,874,082  
44% 
Benefits reduce by 10 percent 
$42,833,733  
43% 
Benefits lag by two years 
$36,290,869  
30% 
Garowe 
Without sensitivity analysis 
$67,264,217  
218% 
Costs increase by 10 percent 
$66,534,858 
195% 
Benefits reduce by 10 percent 
$59,808,437 
193% 
Benefits lag by two years 
$55,177,198 
132% 
Baidoa  
Without sensitivity analysis 
$61,151,649 
106% 
Costs increase by 10 percent 
$59,811,033  
95% 
Benefits reduce by 10 percent 
$53,695,868  
94% 
Benefits lag by two years 
$51,663,862  
88% 
Source: Based on World Bank staff calculations. 
 
66. 
The proposed project bears significant direct and indirect benefits. The direct benefits of this 
Project include the reduced cost of transportation for individuals and for businesses. This bears a number 
of indirect benefits which include greater access to public sectors and to markets, which can foster growth 
in human capital and economic growth which justify the rationale for public sector engagement.
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 72  
     
 
B. Technical Analysis  
 
67. 
The ongoing SUIPP/SUIPP Additional Financing has supported technical studies for investments 
in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Garowe and is currently also supporting studies for Kismayo and Baidoa. In 
Mogadishu, studies are available for 17km of primary roads and 19km of secondary roads and associated 
drainage across 17 districts. In Garowe, studies are available for 2 bridges and 19 secondary roads. In 
Kismayo and Baidoa, feasibility studies are being undertaken for a total of 50km of secondary roads and 
associated drainage for both cities.  In Kismayo 16 roads of about 31 Kms have been prioritized and ranked 
based on multi-criteria analysis during the study; while, in Baidoa 8 roads of about 21km have been 
prioritized and ranked. As such, the project would be able to commence approximately US$16 million of 
civil works soon after project effectiveness and an additional US$20 million in the first year.  
 
68. 
Investments in road upgrading and rehabilitation will be implemented using technology and 
methods that are well known in Somalia (such as asphalt, concrete interlocking blocks, and cobblestone) 
and no technical difficulties are foreseen in this area as long as qualified firms are engaged for the civil 
works. All investments will be designed to correspond to local conditions and will make use of labor-
intensive methods to the extent possible. To insure adequate compliance to technical design, the works 
will be overseen by dedicated supervision consultants engaged by the municipalities, the PIU technical 
team, and the end users or beneficiary community committees who have been involved in the road 
selection and design process. 
 
69. 
The Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs undertaken under SUIPP determined 
that the secondary and urban road investments in the four cities were technically feasible. While the 
Bank’s mobility to the proposed roads was limited, these studies were undertaken by an outsourced firm 
that was able to travel to the specific project sites.  
 
70. 
The SUIPP studies identified precast interlocking concrete paving blocks surfacing for secondary 
roads in Mogadishu given the potential for generating short term income opportunities and the ability of 
communities to maintain the roads themselves with little technical support. Asphaltic concrete (asphalt) 
road surfacing was selected for urban roads in Mogadishu owing to the high traffic volumes on those 
roads. In Garowe, Otta seal which is an asphalt surface treatment constructed by placing a graded 
aggregate on top of a thick application of bituminous binding agent will be used.38 In Kismayo and Baidoa, 
asphalt concrete roads with a mix of two base-course options has been recommended in the feasibility 
studies. One option is cement/lime treated gravel base that has higher use of construction equipment, 
and the other option is hand-packed stone base that is more labour intensive and will therefore promote 
engagement of local community in the construction work.  
 
71. 
In Mogadishu and Garowe, the local construction industry has previously been involved in 
construction of asphalt-based roads and therefore has the capacity to implement these proposed 
investments. Such capacity is not present in Kismayo and Baidoa and firms in the two cities will either 
form joint venture with experienced international firms or those from Mogadishu. Most material for the 
construction of roads are readily available in Somalia while asphalt will be imported. 
 
                                            
38 This is a technology that will generate short term employment and is cheaper than asphalt since the material and 
construction specification are not as strict as for asphalt.
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 72  
     
 
72. 
During construction, contractors will be required to establish their own laboratory for quality 
control tests in accordance with the works specifications. Alternatively, they will identify a suitable third-
party laboratory to carry out required construction materials and works quality tests.  
 
73. 
For all four cities, a 20 percent infrastructure contingency will be provided for any changes in 
physical quantities during construction.  
 
C. Fiduciary 
 
Financial Management  
 
74. 
The financial management residual risk is assessed as Substantial. Financial management capacity 
challenges include: weak PFM legal framework including rudimentary inter-governmental fiscal relations 
between the FGS and FMS as well as municipalities; inadequate financial management competencies and 
internal controls; and rudimentary banking arrangements among others. Various mitigation measures are 
designed specifically for the project. The SURP II will adopt the Use of Country Systems (UCS) in various 
aspects of the project including for accounting and reporting, banking, oversight arrangements with the 
Office of the Auditor General and staffing. This will be supported by TA with clear requirement for 
knowledge transfer incorporated in the Term of Reference. The project would also focus on developing 
FM capacity as part of the project activities. The project will be supported by the existing PIU 
arrangements for the on-going SUIPP and the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) Units that have 
benefited from various fiduciary trainings. Overall the FM arrangements are acceptable for the 
implementation of this operation. 
 
  Procurement  
 
75. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the Procurement 
Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing (IPF): Goods, Works, Non-Consulting 
Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017 and August 2018); Guidelines 
on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits 
and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016); and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Given 
Somalia’s FCV country status, procurement will be processed under the special procurement 
arrangements referred to under paragraph 12 of Section III of the World Bank Policy on Investment Project 
Financing dated September 30, 2018. 
 
76. 
The project design will provide a window to enable the Borrower to carry out advance 
contracting and retroactive financing in accordance with Section V (paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2) of the World 
Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers. The retroactive financing will be allowed up to 20 
percent of the Credit covering the expenditures incurred by the project from July 1, 2019. 
77. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The World 
Bank’s New Procurement Framework (NPF) will apply to this project. According to the requirement of the 
Procurement Regulations, the recipient prepared a PPSD, which describes how procurement activities will 
support project operations for the achievement of the PDOs and deliver value for money.  Based on the 
PPSD, the PP for the first 18 months has been prepared. The PP sets out the selection methods to be in
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 72  
     
 
followed by the Recipient during the project implementation in the procurement of goods, works and 
consulting services. The PP also include the cost estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review 
requirements, brief description of the activities/contracts etc. The PP will be updated at least 12 months, 
or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall require WBG 
approval. All PPs will be publicly disclosed in accordance with World Bank Group (WBG) disclosure policy. 
The procurement management risk for this project is assessed to be Substantial. Annex I provides 
additional information on procurement management.  
78. 
Procurement implementation arrangement: The SURP II will be implemented in a decentralized 
manner through municipalities. PIUs have been staffed with Procurement Specialists among other staff 
through the ongoing SURP/SUIPP in Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa. The SURP II will be 
implemented by the same PIUs.   
79. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP): The WBG’s STEP system will be used 
to prepare, clear and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. The system 
allows the systematic planning and tracking of procurement activities throughout the project cycle, 
including online collaboration with Clients and recording service level standards through workflow. The 
PIUs of Mogadishu, Garowe, Baidoa and Kismayo have already been trained on using STEP.  
D. Legal Operational Policies 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 72  
     
 
E. Environmental and Social  
 
80. 
Potential environmental and social benefits. SURP II will have environmental benefits, including 
(i) improved ambient air quality due to reduced traffic congestion as a result of improved traffic circulation 
and dust suppression by the surfacing of heavily-trafficked roads; (ii) reduced vehicle wear and accident 
hazards; (iii) improved pedestrian traffic safety; and (iv) reduced road flooding and reduced roadside 
erosion. The social benefits of SURP II include: (i) improved community accessibility to schools, health care 
centers, and other livelihood activities; (ii) improved security and safety through improved walkways and 
night-time street lighting; (iii) employment opportunities for the community through construction and 
maintenance of the municipal infrastructure; and (iv) positive economic impacts on livelihood and 
businesses through cost savings on commuting, enhanced accessibility to municipal service points and 
longer trading hours.  
 
81. 
Potential environmental and social risks and impacts and mitigations. Because of the nature 
and relatively moderate scale of the civil works in urban environment, the environmental adverse impacts 
from such physical works will be minor, temporary, and confined to the area immediately surrounding 
the construction. However, the overall Environmental and Social Risks Classification (ESRC) of SURP II is 
High since some key social risks of the project are high, including risks related to the security, GBV and 
the displacement of IDPs. The client’s capacity to manage environmental and social risks in complex 
political, legal and security circumstances is also limited. Additionally, the GBV risk rating for the project 
is High.  Anticipated environmental risks and impacts may include dust generation, noise pollution, soil 
erosion, surface water sedimentation, traffic interruptions, temporarily impeded pedestrian access, 
pollution from construction wastes, as well as waste from worker campsites (where established). These 
short-term impacts will be prevented or mitigated with standard operating procedures and good 
construction management practices. Anticipated social risks and impacts include: (i) land acquisition and 
physical and economic displacement; (ii) potential risks associated with labor and working conditions such 
as OHS risks, child labor, labor influx, and risks of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), sexual harassment 
(SH) and other forms of gender-based violence (GBV); (iii) potential exclusion of disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups from project benefits; and (iv) potential risks of increased social tension in the 
community; and (v) security risks associated with terrorist attacks for stakeholders including project 
workers and the community. These risks will be mitigated through preparation and implementation of 
environmental and social instruments; adoption of mitigation measures proposed in WB Good Practice 
Notes on labor influx and GBV (such as tapping of local workforce, use of code of conduct, collaboration 
with local communities and GBV-related service providers); inclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable 
groups in project activities/benefits including provision of project-related job opportunities; effective 
stakeholder engagement including an inclusive and transparent consultation process and functional GRM; 
and measures to minimize security risks (such as protection of project workers by security authorities).  
 
82. 
Environmental and social instruments for infrastructure investment. The World Bank ESF will be 
applicable to SURP II. While the details of individual subprojects will be determined during the project 
implementation, SURP II takes the framework approach during the project preparation. The 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
prepared under SURP/SUIPP with WB safeguards policies (OPs/BPs) have been updated and the 
Stakeholder Engagement Framework (SEF) and the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have been 
newly prepared in compliance with the ESF. The public consultations on these frameworks were
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 72  
     
 
conducted from April to August 2019 in all municipalities, involving a broad range of stakeholders, 
including potential project-affected communities and vulnerable/disadvantaged groups. The final ESMF 
was disclosed on September 30, 2019, the RPF disclosed on October 2, 2019, and the LMP and SEP 
disclosed on October 3, 2019. Consistent with these frameworks, subproject-specific environmental and 
social instruments will be prepared, reviewed and disclosed before the start of civil works of each 
subproject. Relevant provisions of subproject-specific instruments will be incorporated into procurement 
documents. Key environmental and social commitments of the client have been included in the ESCP.    
 
83. 
Safeguards approach to TA component. While the proposed technical assistance under 
Component 2 (Displacement; O&M of Urban Infrastructure; and Urban Governance and Services) will not 
fund any infrastructure investment, the application of the results of such TA activities, such as policy 
advice, analytics and training events for government authorities, may have adverse environmental and 
social implications. To address such concerns, the ESCP includes a commitment of the borrower to ensure 
that all TA and capacity buidling activities conducted under the Project shall only be undertaken pursuant 
to terms of reference reviewed and approved by the Bank. Such terms of reference shall ensure that the 
TA takes into account, and calls for application of relevant provisions of ESSs and the borrower’s own laws 
relating to the environmental and social aspects. 
 
. 
. 
The screening of environmental and social risks and impacts was conducted by the task team's environmental and 
social specialists through site visits, consultations with key stakeholders and the implementation of the ongoing SURP I 
project. 
. 
 
F. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES 
 
84. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) 
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the 
WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed 
in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit 
their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, 
or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be 
submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and 
Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to submit 
complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service. 
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org.
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 72  
     
 
G. KEY RISKS 
 
85. 
The overall risk rating for SURP II is High. Through this project, investments will be channeled 
through municipal governments at a significant scale for the first time which poses serious risks and 
possible implementation delays. Risks are posed by the challenging operational environment, continued 
insecurity, and inadequate institutional capacity. The Bank will continue to provide intensive supervision 
and oversight to the PIUs at the municipal level and efforts will be made to significantly strengthen federal 
level implementation oversight and supervision capacity through the PCU. The Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM) will outline clear reporting and accountability mechanism and includes guidance to the PIUs 
on how to address the impact of insecurity on the proposed civil works in the project.  
 
86. 
Insecurity risk is High. There are areas across all cities that remain in conflict which affects access 
to locations and insecurity for staff, making monitoring difficult.  Moreover, the security situation may 
prevent or delay the civil works and achievement of project objectives. The project will need to develop 
clear guidelines for addressing insecurity and possibly suspending the civil works which will be outlined in 
the PIM.  The Bank’s supervision and oversight of civil works will be supported through a third-party 
monitoring agent. It is important to note however that the risks related to Al Shabaab activity in urban 
areas cannot be fully mitigated. 
 
87. 
Political and governance risks are High. Al Shabaab still retains control of territory, particularly in 
rural areas but is also present in the cities of Mogadishu, Kismayo and Baidoa.  In Mogadishu, the group 
collects rents from major businesses which can potentially affect project implementation.  Moreover, the 
political process, including the relationship between the FMS and the central FGS remains fragile. This risk 
can enter the project level with political competition over scarce financial resources. Mitigating measures 
will include regular communication on project activities, allocations and processes with all levels of 
government including through the project steering committee. All procurements and awarded contracts 
will be publicly disclosed.  
 
88. 
Technical design of project risk is Substantial. Civil works are not likely to be complex. The risk 
however is rated as substantial given these would be contracted and supervised through municipalities. 
In Kismayo and Baidoa, these municipalities would be implementing infrastructure investments for the 
first time. PIUs will be staffed with a Project Engineer to support the technical aspects of works. The 
project will also be supported by an engineer on the Bank task team and a contracted engineering 
supervision agent(s) with extensive experience in civil works supervision in Somalia.  
 
89. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are High. Capacity and 
authority in Somalia are relatively weak given the history of conflict and mistrust with public institutions.  
All PIUs would need to ensure the recruitment of qualified consultants and conform to the guidelines of 
the Civil Service Commission. These staff will continue to receive regular training and support both 
through the project management and institutional strengthening component in the project. Intensive 
support will be provided at key stages of implementation such as during evaluation of bids for contractors.  
 
90. 
Fiduciary risks are High.  The financial management and procurement environment in Somalia 
are challenging and fraud and corruption risks in the project are high given the significant amount of civil 
works being implemented. Although anticorruption and public-sector regulations are in place, problems
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 72  
     
 
persist, contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. Mitigation measures for governance 
issues have been built into the project design with a strict fiduciary control mechanism and application of 
Bank fiduciary rules as well as a focus on social accountability.  The project will ensure that the PIUs always 
have dedicated procurement and financial management specialists in place and that the PIM includes a 
well described fiduciary management process. A Monitoring Agent further supports the MPF projects on 
managing fiduciary challenges. Moreover, the Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) Prevention Services 
Unit carried out a portfolio wide review for Somalia in coordination with the country management and 
task teams to identify fraud and corruption mitigation measures that can be applied.  
 
91. 
Environment and Social risks are High.  Due to the nature and relatively moderate scale of the 
civil works in urban environment, the adverse environmental impacts from such physical works will be 
minor, temporary, and confined to the area immediately surrounding the construction. However, the 
overall environmental and social risks are high given the overall insecurity in Somalia, the high levels of 
GBV risk and the displacement of IDPs. The client’s capacity to manage environmental and social risks in 
complex political, legal and security circumstances is also limited. Project activities may also cause physical 
and economic displacement of several households and structures, including those of established roadside 
vendors, encroaching on the roadways. The civil work will entail risks related to labor and working 
conditions, such as occupational and community health and safety risks and child labor. The project might 
also exacerbate risks related to persistent social tensions and incidence of violence (for example, dispute 
over physical/economic displacement or dissatisfaction of districts that have not been chosen for 
subproject locations). Mitigation measures will include the implementation of resettlement action plans 
and labor management procedures, inclusive and transparent stakeholder engagement, and effective 
grievance redress mechanisms, and measures to minimize security risks (such as protection of project 
workers by security authorities). To strengthen the capacity of the Somali governments, including 
municipal governments, to manage environmental and social risks and impacts with the ESF, additional 
support from the Bank task team and the supervision consultant will be deployed. 
 
92. 
GBV risks are High. Incidence of GBV in Somalia is a significant contextual and project-related 
challenge. Assessment of project-related risks of SEA, sexual harassment and other forms of GBV has been 
conducted during project preparation as per the WB Good Practice Note on Addressing GBV. This 
assessment indicates that the GBV risks of the project are high. Given such risks and the context of 
pervasive insecurity. The project will adopt a robust and comprehensive approach to address potential 
GBV risks. Relevant mitigation measures to address these risks (e.g., integrating Codes of Conduct with 
SEA/GBV-related protections; community consultations and sensitization activities to raise awareness of 
potential risks; hiring of GBV experts for the project implementation and monitoring (such as in the PIU, 
engineering and supervision consultant and third-party monitoring agent); mapping activities to identify 
potential service providers in project affected areas; development of a GBV Action Plan; and 
establishment of GRM with procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential and ethical reporting of 
GBV incidents) to be articulated in relevant environmental and social instruments. Given security risks and 
potential risks of sexual harassment in recruitment and retention of skilled and unskilled female workers, 
additional measures to address workplace sexual harassment and to assure safety of female workers hired 
under the project will be also identified. GBV sensitization activities, in line with global guidelines on 
ethical engagement, should be integrated into the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. Mechanisms to enable 
monitoring of GBV risk management through Third-Party Monitoring will be established. The project will 
establish partnerships and enable financing with identified GBV service providers. The project includes
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 72  
     
 
provision of capacity building and training of relevant stakeholders, including contractors and project 
workers, in additional to capacity building for government partners. GBV risks will be monitored 
throughout project implementation through regular re-assessment, particularly as new project locations 
are determined, and through regular monitoring activities. 
 
93. 
Stakeholder risk is High. The current context in Somalia, characterized by the lack of trust 
between key groups in society, and the accompanying high levels of contestation and violence, presents 
a high risk stakeholder environment for this project.  Opposition from stakeholders (civil society, private 
sector organizations, other donors and other members of the general public), or districts that have not 
been chosen for investments under SURP II are possible.  This can potentially have a negative impact on 
the achievement of the PDO.  The respective municipalities and Project Coordinators will play a key role 
in managing communications with stakeholders. Moreover, the project’s GRM would help manage 
grievances from communities and the private sector.  
 
94. 
Table 5 below outlines key risk mitigation measures likely to be included in this project.  
 
Table 5. Proposed Risk Mitigation Measures 
 
Fiduciary 
Use of direct payments  
The direct payment method will be used for all larger 
transactions such as payments to engineering 
supervision consultants, consultants carrying out 
technical studies and contractors as applicable.  
Project Bank Accounts 
The project would have Designated Accounts 
managed by the Office of the Accountant General in 
the federal Ministry of Finance with project accounts 
managed by the State Ministries of Finance. All 
transactions for municipalities would be processed 
through their respective State EAFS. 
Ceiling of the Designated Account  
The DA ceilings would be retained at a maximum of 2 
quarters of forecasted expenditures to reduce the 
amount of funding that the project has access to at 
any given time. 
Quarterly review of project budget  
The PIUs will be required to submit budgets including 
all operating expenses to the Bank for review and 
approval on a quarterly basis.  
Procurement reviews 
All procurement activities regardless of value, nature, 
categories or packages are treated as prior reviews 
and reviewed by the TTL and procurement staff. 
Hands on procurement support  
The World Bank will engage a short-term procurement 
consultant to provide hands on support to the 
Government in procurement – particularly during the 
bid evaluation process for civil works. The possibility 
of outsourcing all procurement to a Procurement 
Agent at the federal level will be explored.  
Monitoring/ 
Verification 
Third-party monitoring 
A third-party monitoring agent will be engaged to 
verify the completion of sub-projects, the quality of 
construction and the adherence to safeguard policies. 
The potential of using the Third-Party Monitor for
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 72  
     
 
monitoring of GBV related risks and incidences is being 
explored. 
Geo-enabled monitoring 
Geo-tagging of sub-projects to better monitor and 
verify implementation progress will be introduced; 
this is essential for the more inaccessible areas. 
Engineering Supervision Consultant 
A qualified engineering supervision consultant(s) will 
be recruited to supervise the day to day construction 
of the civil works. The Consultant will also be 
responsible for ensuring adherence to the Banks 
environment and social safeguard policies as well as 
the participatory and inclusive selection of unskilled 
labor.  
Enhanced 
conflict 
sensitivity  
Strengthened Grievance Redress 
and Feedback Mechanism 
Special attention will be provided to the GRM which 
will ensure project related tensions/conflict are 
addressed early on. The GRM will provide multiple 
channels for uptake of grievances, keeping in mind the 
context of Somalia with low literacy rates and limited 
mobility of women. Specific provisions to enable safe, 
confidential and ethical reporting of SEA/SH or GBV 
incidence will be identified and integrated into GRM 
design. 
 
 .
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 72  
     
 
H. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
 
      
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II 
 
Project Development Objectives(s) 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments and increase access to urban infrastructure and services in selected areas. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
To support the construction of key urban infrastructure in targeted cities  
People with access to all season roads within a 
500 meter range (% female, %IDPs, %host 
communities) (Number)  
3,500.00 
5,000.00 
30,000.00 
Financed subprojects functioning and delivering 
services one year after completion. (Percentage)  
0.00 
90.00 
90.00 
Municipalities with clean financial project audits 
that continue to remain eligible for the project 
(Number)  
0.00 
4.00 
4.00 
 
PDO Table SPACE
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 72  
     
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
1 
Urban Infrastructure and Services  
Urban roads rehabilitated or upgraded 
(Kilometers)  
0.00 
15.00 
45.00 
Pedestrian walkways constructed (Kilometers)  
0.00 
5.00 
10.00 
Person days of employment created (days, % 
female, % IDPs, % host) (Number)  
0.00 
40,000.00 
100,000.00 
Subprojects with post-construction Operations & 
Maintenance plans (Number)  
0.00 
10.00 
20.00 
Number of women engaged in unskilled labor 
activities in the project (Number)  
0.00 
15.00 
50.00 
Beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure met their 
needs (number, % female, %IDPs) (Percentage)  
0.00 
60.00 
70.00 
Institutional Strengthening and Analytics  
Inter-governmental forum discussions held 
between federal/state/municipal levels (Number)  
0.00 
2.00 
4.00 
Municipalities with improved O&M plans 
(Number)  
0.00 
2.00 
4.00 
Project Management and Capacity Building  
Project and municipal staff formally trained on 
core municipal functions (Number)  
0.00 
35.00 
80.00 
Participants in consultation activities during 
project implementation (Number)  
0.00 
150.00 
400.00 
Greivances registered related to delivery of 
project benefits that are addressed (Percentage)  
0.00 
60.00 
85.00 
Women engaged in consultation activities during 
project implementation (Number)  
0.00 
30.00 
100.00 
Contingent Emergency Response
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 72  
     
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
1 
Specific Operation Manual developed for crisis 
response (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Beneficiaries covered under the activated crisis 
response (Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
 
IO Table SPACE 
 
UL Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
People with access to all season roads 
within a 500 meter range (% female, 
%IDPs, %host communities) 
All-season road is defined as 
a road that is passable all 
year by the prevailing 
means of transport (e.g. a 
car, fire truck, or ambulance 
which may not have four-
wheel drive). Predictable 
interruptions of short 
duration during inclement 
weather (e.g. heavy rainfall) 
are acceptable, particularly 
on low-volume roads. Road 
blocks due to security 
purposes are also 
acceptable.  The proportion 
of beneficiaries that are 
female, IDPs or host 
Annual 
 
Project 
progress 
reports, 
UNFPA 
population 
figures for 
districts if 
available and 
with support 
from 
municipalitie
s. 
 
Guidance on people 
with access: The data 
on the number of 
people provided with 
access can be 
measured by assessing 
the kilometers of roads 
constructed or 
rehabilitated and 
estimates of the 
population in the 
project area within a 
500-meter range that 
will access these roads 
(based on population 
density estimates by 
the municipality). 500 
Municipalities, PIU, PCU
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 72  
     
 
communities will also need 
to be measured and 
calculated as a percentage. 
This indicator will be 
disaggregated by city. 
meters is roughly 
equivalent to 5-10 
minutes walking time. 
 
Financed subprojects functioning and 
delivering services one year after 
completion. 
These are subprojects that 
are still being used by 
communities one year after 
completion and handover of 
the subproject by the 
contractor. Subprojects 
affected by natural disasters 
or conflict are not 
considered to calculate this 
indicator. This is a long term 
project and is likely to have 
subsequent phases. Those 
subprojects completed in 
the last year of 
implementation can 
therefore be evaluated in 
the subsequent phase of the 
project. 
Annual 
 
Quarterly 
project 
reports/Annu
al reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports and verification 
of data by the PCU 
 
Municipalities, PIU, PCU 
 
Municipalities with clean financial project 
audits that continue to remain eligible for 
the project 
Municipalities that have 
clean audits based on the 
annual project wide 
financial audits. 
Municipalities must also not 
have any ineligible 
expenditures or declared 
mis-procurements which 
would exclude them from 
Annual 
 
Annual 
project 
audits 
 
Review of annual 
project audits 
 
PCU, federal EAFS
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 72  
     
 
any additional infrastructure 
financing from the project. 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Urban roads rehabilitated or upgraded 
Measures cumulative length 
of all newly constructed 
and/or rehabilitated roads 
in the 4 municipalities 
thereby improving urban 
mobility. Road-side drains 
are systematically included 
in the road improvements 
and will not be double 
counted under the project. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports, 
Supervision 
engineers 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports and 
contractor reports 
 
PIUs, PCU, Municipality 
 
Pedestrian walkways constructed 
Measures cumulative length 
of all newly constructed 
pedestrian walkways in the 
4 municipalities, thereby 
improving mobility of 
pedestrians. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports and 
contractors reports 
 
PIU, Municipalities 
 
Person days of employment created 
(days, % female, % IDPs, % host) 
These are the number of 
people benefiting from 
short term employment 
opportunities created by 
civil works financed through 
this project. Percentage of 
beneficiaries that are 
female, IDP, host 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
reports, 
contractors 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision and 
contractor reports 
 
PIU, Municipality, PCU
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 72  
     
 
communities will need to be 
calculated. The values will 
be broken down by city. 
Subprojects with post-construction 
Operations & Maintenance plans 
Subproject specific 
operations and 
maintenance plans are to be 
prepared for each 
subproject supported by 
SURP II which include 
indicative operating budgets 
and identifies key 
stakeholders responsible for 
maintenance. 
Annual 
 
Engineering 
supervision 
reports, 
quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports, 
quarterly reports 
 
PIUs, Municipalities 
 
Number of women engaged in unskilled 
labor activities in the project 
These are the number of 
women benefiting from 
short term employment 
opportunities created by 
civil works financed through 
this project. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports, 
Supervision 
engineers 
reports 
 
Site visits, review of 
reports 
 
Municipalities/PIUs/PCU 
 
Beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure 
met their needs (number, % female, 
%IDPs) 
Beneficiaries are people or 
groups who directly derive 
benefits from improved 
roads in this project and 
their satisfaction with the 
infrastructure will be 
assessed through 
questionnaires in focus 
group discussions.  The 
measure of satisfaction will 
need to look at multiple 
Mid-term 
and end 
project. 
 
Mid-term 
and end 
project 
evaluation 
 
Review of evaluation 
reports 
 
PIU/Municipality, PCU
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 72  
     
 
dimensions including the 
quality of the rehabilitated 
infrastructure and whether 
the rehabilitated road has 
improved their access to 
services/jobs. Satisfaction to 
be calculated through focus 
group discussions and or 
surveys. 
Inter-governmental forum discussions 
held between federal/state/municipal 
levels 
The number of meetings 
held that involve the 
different layers of the 
government to discuss 
issues related to the project, 
functional assignments 
related to service delivery, 
revenue sharing etc. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
Quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of project 
quarterly reports 
 
PIU, municipality, PCU 
 
Municipalities with improved O&M plans 
These are O&M plans that 
are informed by the number 
of km of paved roads in the 
city that needs to be 
maintained, the institutional 
structure within the 
municipality that would 
implement the O&M plan 
and the availability of 
financing within the 
municipality. 
Annual 
 
Quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports 
 
PIU, Municipality, PCU 
 
Project and municipal staff formally 
trained on core municipal functions 
The number of municipal 
staff trained in 
procurement, financial 
management, social and 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
progress reports 
 
PIU, PCU and 
Municipalities
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 72  
     
 
environment safeguard 
management, project 
management etc 
Participants in consultation activities 
during project implementation 
This indicator measures the 
level of community 
engagement  in project 
implementation - this 
includes in the selection of 
subprojects, during 
construction and in the 
selection of beneficiaries for 
casual labor and in 
maintenance activities. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, mid-
term and end 
project 
evaluation 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports, focus group 
discussions or surveys 
in midterm/end project 
evaluation 
 
PIU, PCU, Municipalities 
 
Greivances registered related to delivery 
of project benefits that are addressed 
This indicator measures the 
transparency and 
accountability mechanism 
established by the project. 
Grievances would need to 
be registered and 
responded to. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
progress reports 
 
PIU, PCU, Municipalities 
 
Women engaged in consultation activities 
during project implementation 
This indicator measures the 
level of engagement of 
women in project 
implementation - this 
includes in the selection of 
subprojects, during 
construction and in the 
selection of beneficiaries for 
casual labor and in 
maintenance activities. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
progress reports 
 
Municipalities/PIUs/PCU 
 
Specific Operation Manual developed for 
crisis response 
An operational manual for 
the CERC will need to be 
 
 
 
Municipalities, PCU
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 of 72  
     
 
developed that outlines the 
eligible activities to be 
financed under this 
component if triggered and 
the implementation 
modalities. 
Beneficiaries covered under the activated 
crisis response 
The number of people 
benefiting from the CERC if 
it is triggered. This will vary 
depending on the amount of 
funding allocated for this 
crisis response. 
 
 
 
Municipalities, PIU, PCU 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 of 72  
     
 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan  
 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II 
 
Overall Implementation Arrangements  
 
1. 
The proposed SURP II will be implemented on behalf of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
by the BRA, Garowe Municipality, Kismayo Municipality and Baidoa Municipality using proceeds from the 
Somalia MPF and IDA through a Grant Agreement/Legal Agreement with the World Bank. Once the new 
cities in Galmudug and Hirshabelle States have been selected, these cities will also be implementing 
entities in the project.  The Grant Agreement/Legal Agreement would be signed between the World Bank 
and the Ministry of Finance and the Federal Government would have oversight of the project.  
 
2. 
Federal-level roles and responsibilities.  A federal inter-ministerial Steering Committee chaired 
by the Office of the Prime Minister and the Aid Coordination Unit will be set up and would meet on a 
quarterly basis or more frequently as needed. Other key line ministries represented in the steering 
committee will be the Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development (MoPIED), Ministry 
of Public Works, and the Ministry of Finance. This Steering Committee will also include one representative 
from each Federal Member State participating in the project.39 The Steering Committee will be responsible 
for providing strategic guidance to the project, approving the inclusion of additional cities into the project 
and deciding on the funding allocations across cities.  
 
3. 
A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will also be set up at the federal level in the Ministry of Public 
Works. This PCU will be staffed with a Program Coordinator, Finance Specialist, Procurement Specialist, 
Environment/Social Safeguards Specialist, Gender Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist and 
other technical staff as needed.  The PCU will be responsible for providing technical support and guidance 
to the municipalities as needed. The Program Coordinator will act as the Secretariat to the Steering 
Committee.  
 
4. 
State- level roles and responsibilities. State level inter-ministerial committees would be set up to 
provide a platform for coordination, information dissemination and consultation at the State level. These 
committees would include the Ministries of Public Works, Planning, Finance and Interior as well as the 
Mayors of the cities benefiting from the project.  These committees have already been established in 
Jubbaland and South West State but will need to be established in Puntland. They will also be established 
in Galmudug and Hirshabelle once those two states formally join the project. Given there will already be 
a federal level steering committee, an additional committee for BRA will not be required. Subsidiary 
Agreements will be prepared and negotiated for each State and BRA to clearly outline the roles and 
responsibilities of the State/BRA vis a vis the federal level.  
 
5. 
Municipal- level roles and responsibilities. Under SURP II, the BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa 
Municipalities will have overall responsibility for project implementation in their respective cities. PIUs 
                                            
39 The Mayor of Mogadishu would represent the Benadir Regional Administration and the Ministries of Public Works would 
represent the other FMS.
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 of 72  
     
 
have already been established within the BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa Municipalities who report to 
the respective Mayors. The PIUs will have project management responsibility, coordinating overall project 
implementation, ensuring the timely availability of fund transfer to contractors, implementing the 
relevant safeguard instruments and ensuring continuous community outreach and consultation, 
maintaining project accounts and producing financial reports, monitoring and evaluating program 
implementation and impacts, developing and implementing the GRM and reporting results to various 
stakeholders. Once Galmudug and Hirshabelle enter the program, PIUs will also be established in the 
participating cities and once these cities meet the relevant participation criteria, they will also have overall 
responsibility for project implementation. 
 
6. 
The PIUs will be supported by a contracted engineering supervision consultant who will be 
responsible for monitoring the contractors of the civil works as well as monitoring adherence to the 
safeguard instruments. A third-party monitoring agent will be contracted by the World Bank to provide 
quality assurance –carry out spot checks on both the engineering quality of the civil works and adherence 
to the safeguard instruments.  
 
7. 
Given that SURP II is following on from the ongoing SUIPP and the SURP, the PIUs in Mogadishu, 
Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa are in a satisfactory state of readiness for rapid project implementation. 
Under SUIPP/SURP, the PIUs were staffed with a Project Focal Point/Coordinators, Procurement 
Specialists, Finance Specialists, Project Engineers, Environment and Social Safeguard Specialists and M&E 
Specialists. These positions were all competitively recruited. The capacity in the PIUs will continue to be 
enhanced through training by the World Bank technical staff on fiduciary and safeguards issues as well as 
the engineering supervision firm.  
 
Figure 1.1: SURP II Implementation Arrangements 
 
 
 
8. 
Details for each officer in the PCU and PIU are provided below:
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 of 72  
     
 
PCU Staff 
 
9. 
Program Coordinator. The position will be the primary interlocutor for the project with federal 
government institutions, FMS, local governments and the World Bank.  He/she will also have an oversight 
role of the project overall, ensuring it is on track to deliver on project objectives as well as ensuring 
adherence to the reporting, fiduciary, environment and social safeguard requirements. The Program 
Coordinator will also provide guidance and support to the PIUs on budgetary and fiduciary management 
issues, or any other issues that PIUs request help on related to the project. Finally, the Program 
Coordinator will liaise with other stakeholders to ensure coordination and synergies across relevant 
projects.  
 
10.  
Environment and Social Safeguard Specialist. Responsible for providing technical support to the 
PIUs in the preparation of safeguard documentation and monitoring/reporting on safeguards 
implementation. Responsible for supporting the PIUs in preparation of any ToRs as necessary for the 
preparation of any additional safeguard documents. The E&S Specialist is also responsible for finding 
solutions to safeguard challenges faced during implementation and identify ways of improving safeguards 
management/monitoring in the project.    
 
10. 
Gender Specialist. Responsible for supporting the preparation of the GBV Action plan and ensuring 
its implementation throughout the project. Providing technical assistance to the PIUs setting 
up/improving the project GRMs to ensure it is equipped to hand GBV issues. Providing quality assurance 
of community engagement activities in the project with regards to ensuring women’s participation and 
voice in project implementation.  
 
11. 
Procurement Specialist. Responsible for providing technical support to the PIUs in all procurement 
related issues related to the project. Providing additional training to the procurement specialists when 
needed and providing on-the-job technical support as needed on issues such as STEP, bid evaluations etc. 
The Procurement Specialist is also responsible for ensuring overall quality of all procurement documents 
sent to the World Bank (Terms of References, Requests for Quotations/Proposals, draft contracts etc). 
 
12. 
Finance Specialist. Responsible for ensuring the quality of all financial reports prepared by the PIU 
and collating these and sharing with the World Bank for review. The Finance Specialist is also responsible 
for liaising day to day with the EAFS at the federal Ministry of Finance to process withdrawal applications 
for all FMS/PIUs. 
 
13. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. Responsible for setting up the overall an M&E system for 
the project, monitoring the physical and financial progress across all cities and tracking the project’s 
progress towards meeting the PDO.  The PCU M&E Specialist is also responsible for leading on project 
evaluations and overseeing the baseline and end-line surveys across the project. Finally, the PCU M&E 
Specialist is responsible for collating all project reports from the PIUs and sharing them with the World 
Bank/donors.   
 
PIU Staff 
 
14. 
Project Coordinator. Has overall responsibility for management of the PIU and PIU team – this
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 of 72  
     
 
includes recruitment of new staff, performance evaluations of existing staff and extending contracts as 
necessary.  The Coordinator will ensure the project is implemented in compliance with all fiduciary and 
safeguard requirements, reviewing and approving all reporting on the project for submission to the 
Municipality and the World Bank.  
 
15. 
Engineer. Responsible for overseeing the preparation of bidding documents, being involved in the 
assessment of bids.  The Engineer is also responsible for assessing the quality and progress of 
implementation of the civil works in close consultation with the supervision agent.  
 
16. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. In close consultation with the PCU M&E Specialist, 
responsible for setting up an M&E system for the project within the respective municipality, monitoring 
the physical and financial progress within the city and preparing quarterly/monthly reports.  The M&E 
Specialist is responsible for updating the project Results Framework for the respective city ahead of each 
Implementation Support Mission. Finally, the M&E Specialist would be providing any necessary support 
to the PCU M&E Specialist in carrying out project evaluations (baseline and endline surveys).  
 
17. 
Environment and Social Safeguard Specialist. Responsible for preparing the ToRs for the 
preparation of safeguard documents under the guidance of the PCU E&S Specialist. Together, with the 
Project Coordinator, the E&S Specialist is responsible for ensuring compliance with the ESMP/RAPs and 
the payment of compensation.  
 
18. 
Procurement Specialist. Responsible for preparing, implementing and monitoring the project 
procurement plan. With support from the Project Engineer and Coordinator, the PS is also responsible for 
leading the preparation of all procurement documents including bid documents, bid evaluations and 
contracts and ensuring all procurements are carried out through STEP.  
 
19. 
Finance Specialist. Responsible for managing all project finances in the respective city, preparing 
timely financial reports for the city and submitting these to the PCU Finance Specialist. Finally, the Finance 
Specialist is responsible for liaising with the State level EAFS to process withdrawal applications as 
necessary.  
 
Procurement  
 
20. 
Procurement procedures: Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements 
in the Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing (IPF): Goods, Works, 
Non-Consulting Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017 and August 
2018); Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans 
and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016); and provisions stipulated in the Financing 
Agreement. Given Somalia’s FCV country status, procurement will be processed under the special 
procurement arrangements referred to under paragraph 12 of Section III of the World Bank Policy on 
Investment Project Financing dated September 30, 2018. The project design has provided a window for 
the Borrower to carry out advance contracting and retroactive financing in accordance with Section V 
(paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2) of the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers. The retroactive 
financing will be allowed up to 20 percent of the Credit covering the expenditures incurred by the project 
with effect from July 1, 2019 before the signing of the Credit Agreement under the activities agreed with
=== PAGE 56 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 72  
     
 
the World Bank.  
 
21. 
PPSD and PP. The World Bank’s New Procurement Framework (NPF) will apply to this project. 
According to the requirement of the Procurement Regulations, the recipient prepared a PPSD which has 
been agreed to between the Borrower and the World Bank.  The PPSD describes how procurement 
activities will support project operations for the achievement of the PDOs and deliver value for money. 
Based on the PPSD, the PP for the first 18 months has been prepared. The PP sets out the selection 
methods to be followed by the Recipient during the project implementation in the procurement of goods, 
works and consulting services. The implementing agencies have prepared PPs which include the cost 
estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review requirements, brief description of the 
activities/contracts etc. The PPs will be updated at least every 12 months, or as required to reflect the 
actual project implementation needs, but each update shall require WBG approval. All PPs will be publicly 
disclosed in accordance with World Bank Group (WBG) disclosure policy.  
 
22. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement. The World Bank’s STEP system will be used to 
prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of the PIUs 
have already been trained and using STEP under SUIPP/SURP. 
 
23. 
National Public Procurement Law and Procurement Templates: The Public Procurement, 
Concessions and Disposal Act, 2015 (PPA) for the FGS is the relevant public procurement legal framework. 
The new Act foresees a decentralized system of procurement. The Act further provides for an independent 
oversight body that will foster the regulatory and the policy framework of public procurement in the 
country. The PPA has been reviewed by the World Bank and found to be satisfactory and consistent with 
the National Procurement Procedure requirements prescribed in paragraph 5.4 of the Regulations to a 
large extent. However, institutions are not yet in place in accordance with the Act. Similarly, regulations 
and other procurement guidance documents, including Standard Bidding Documents, are yet to be 
finalized. The private sector and civil society have limited capacity or functionality. Currently, the process 
of operationalizing the PPA are underway. Until such time that the PPA is operationalized, and the 
documents reviewed and found satisfactory by the World Bank, the Project shall use the World Bank’s 
Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) customized to national standards (agreed by the World Bank 
with the Borrower) when approaching the national market. Also, the World Bank’s SPDs shall be used for 
procurement of goods, works, and non-consulting services under open International Competitive 
Procurement. In accordance with the PPA, it is anticipated that, when the PPA is operationalized, for the 
national procedures to be used, the following shall be observed: (i) the request for bids/request for 
proposals document shall require that Bidders/Proposers submitting Bids/Proposals present a signed 
acceptance at the time of bidding, to be incorporated in any resulting contracts, confirming application 
of, and compliance with, the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines, including without limitation to the 
World Bank’s right to sanction and the World Bank’s inspection and audit rights; and (ii) rights for the 
World Bank to review Borrower’s procurement documentation and activities. 
 
24. 
Publication Advertising: The Borrower is required to prepare and submit to the World Bank a 
General Procurement Notice. The World Bank will arrange for its publication in United Nations 
Development Business online (UNDB online) and on the World Bank’s external website. Specific 
Procurement Notices for all procurement under open international competitive procurement and 
Requests for Expressions of Interest for all consultancies estimated to cost not less than US$300,000 shall
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 of 72  
     
 
be published in at least one newspaper of national circulation in the borrower’s country, or in the official 
gazette, or on a widely used website or electronic portal with free national and international access, and 
in UNDB online. 
 
25. 
Procurement implementation arrangement and Procurement capacity assessment: SURP II will 
be implemented on behalf of the FGS by the BRA/Mogadishu Municipality, Garowe Municipality, Kismayo 
Municipality and Baidoa Municipality. Under SURP II, the BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa Municipalities 
will have overall responsibility for project implementation in their respective cities. PIUs have already 
been established within the BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa Municipalities under the on-going 
SURP/SUIPP. A procurement capacity assessment of the PIUs to implement project procurement has been 
carried out by the World Bank for BRA, Garowe, Kismayo and Baidoa. In Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and 
Baidoa each of the procurement function for the SUIPP/SURP is led by a national Procurement Specialist 
(PS), who is part of the PIU. The Procurement Specialists have adequate academic qualifications but have 
not undergone substantive Public Procurement training. Based on previous procurement under 
SUIPP/SURP, their experiences in public procurement are inadequate. Reviews of procurement 
documents under SURP/SUIPP shows that they are still learning how to carry out public procurement 
using World Bank Procurement Regulations. The implementation of SUIPP/SURP was characterized by 
substantial delays due to weak procurement capacity. In this regard, the PIUs will require support to 
undertake the necessary procurement according to the Bank procedures satisfactorily. The PIUs will be 
supported by a contracted engineering supervision consultant who will be responsible for monitoring the 
contractors of the civil works as well as monitoring adherence to the safeguard instruments. A third-party 
monitor contracted by the World Bank will provide quality assurance of the supervision carried out by the 
engineering supervision consultant and carry out spot checks on both the engineering quality of the civil 
works and adherence to the safeguard instruments.  
 
26. 
A PCU will also be set at the federal level, at the Ministry of Public Works given the expansion of 
the project from two FMS or Municipalities to six States/Municipalities and subsequently six different 
PIUs. Given that there will be six PIUs already staffed with Project Coordinators and fiduciary and 
safeguards staff, it would be critical for the PCU to recruit highly qualified consultants that are able to add 
value and provide the necessary technical guidance needed. The area where this is particularly important 
is in procurement due to weak capacity (focusing on improving the quality of ToRs, shortlisting 
reports/evaluation report and bidding documents).  
 
27.   
The project envisages procurement of the following main contracts:  
(i) 
Small Works (Constructions of Roads) 
(ii) 
Consultancies (Feasibility Study, Design, Preparation of detailed designs and bidding 
documents for community roads, supervision of construction off community roads and TA 
consultancy services.  
(iii) 
Non consulting services 
(iv) 
Goods (Office Equipment, Vehicles and Office supplies 
 
28. 
For the proposed works contracts, an assessment of the road construction capacity identified local 
road construction companies are available in Somalia who can construct the roads under the project. 
Most of these firms are based in Mogadishu and Garowe. Firms in Mogadishu have interest to work in 
Baidoa and Kismayo where capacity of local firms is low. It was also noted that in the past decade, very
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 of 72  
     
 
little asphalt concrete road construction has been undertaken in Somalia. In this regard, local firms will be 
encouraged to form joint ventures with firms that have the experience and technical capacity to 
effectively undertake the project works. Due to contract sizes and security concerns especially in 
Mogadishu, there is a possibility that foreign firms will most likely be discouraged from participation. In 
this regards, open national competitive procurement method will be used, and the recommended 
selection method would be Request for Bids (RFB).  
 
29. 
Consultancy services will include recruitment of consultant firms and individuals from local and 
international market as appropriate. There are limited domestic capacity of firms/individuals who can be 
engaged for Technical Assistance (TA). However, there are well qualified consulting firms and individuals 
mainly from the region who have participated in the previous consultancy assignments in the past. 
Previous experience from the on-going SURP and from other similar projects shows that both local and 
foreign firms have participated in the bid opportunities. In some instances, local firms have partnered 
with foreign firms. There is therefore a likelihood of foreign firms to associate with national firms to 
enhance their capacity. Firms and individuals will be selected on open-international/national basis as 
appropriate. The preferred procurement method for firms under consulting services would be QCBS. 
However, other methods including Consultant Qualification and direct selection would be used as 
stipulated in the Procurement Plan. 
 
30. 
Contracts under non-consulting services include activities such as workshop venues, transport, 
printing services or IT services. These non-consulting services are available either locally or internationally. 
Given the size and nature of non-consulting services to be procured, most of the potential bidders are 
available locally. Such items will be procured through Open National Market Approach and Request for 
Quotations. 
 
31. 
Somalia has available local traders for ICT equipment, scientific equipment, motor vehicles, and 
furniture and other office supplies. For equipment, vehicles and ICT hardware and Software, no domestic 
manufacturing capacity or facility to produce these goods, equipment and machineries. The bidders 
import the equipment/goods and provide after sales support. For this reason, such items will be procured 
using either Open National Market Approach or Request for Quotation method. Procurement of Vehicles, 
Office Equipment and ICT Hardware etc. will be procured through RFB. The specifications for these items 
are of standard nature.  
 
32. 
Training and Workshops: The project will finance training and workshops, if required, based on 
an annual training plan and budget which shall be submitted to the World Bank for its prior review and 
approval. Training and Workshops will not be treated as Procurement Transaction unless a service 
provider is exclusively hired from market through agreed Selection Method of Consultant/Non-
consultancy to render the training or capacity development. The annual training plan will identify, inter 
alia: (i) the training envisaged; (ii) the justification for the training; (iii) the personnel to be trained; (iv) the 
duration for such training; and (v) the estimated cost of the training. At the time of the actual training, the 
request shall be submitted to the World Bank for review and approval. Upon completion of the training, 
the trainees shall be required to prepare and submit a report on the training received. 
 
33. 
Risk Assessment 
In view of the challenges identified, the risk for procurement is considered High. The risk is reduced to a
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 of 72  
     
 
residual rating of Substantial in view of the mitigation measures proposed in the Table below.  
 
Table 1.1. Procurement Risks and Mitigation Measures 
 
No 
Risk Description 
Description of Mitigation Measures 
Timeframe 
Responsibility 
1. 
Inadequate 
knowledge and 
experience of World 
Bank Procurement 
Regulations for 
Borrowers under IPF: 
Goods, Works, Non-
Consulting Services 
and Consulting 
Services dated July 1, 
2016 (revised 
November 2017 and 
August 2018); 
• 
Recruit a qualified Procurement 
Consultant through the PCU with 
qualifications 
and 
experience 
acceptable to IDA for the duration of 
the Project to build the capacity of 
the National Procurement Specialists 
of the PIUs, apart from assisting in 
processing procurement activities for 
the Project 
During Project 
implementation 
Ministry of Public 
Works 
• 
Training and capacity building on the 
Bank’s Procurement Regulations and 
contract management to PIUs.   
• 
Prior 
review 
of 
all 
contracts 
regardless of the value. 
During Project 
Implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB 
2. 
Inadequate skills by 
the end users in 
developing 
Specifications   and 
Terms of Reference 
(TOR) 
• 
Need for TAs/Consultants in the 
respective technical areas to extend 
hands on support.  
• 
Support by the PCU staff. 
• 
Train staff in preparation of TORs/Bid 
specifications 
During Project 
Implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo, Baidoa 
Municipalities and 
PCU/WB 
3. 
Bidders not familiar 
with bidding 
procedures using WB 
procurement 
procedures  
• 
Conduct workshops (and pre-bid/pre-
proposal 
conferences) 
for 
bidders/Consultants 
on 
how 
to 
submit acceptable bids/Proposals 
During Project 
Implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities 
4. 
Absence of defined 
procurement 
complaint (including 
allegation of fraud 
and corruption) 
handling mechanism 
• 
As the procurement law is not fully 
operational, 
any 
procurement 
complaint by dissatisfied bidders or 
stakeholders may be lodged to the 
accounting officer and the Project 
Coordinator has to respond within a 
reasonable time.  
• 
Enough guidance to be provided in 
the bidding/proposal documents on 
where to lodge complaints. 
• 
Responses to complaint by the 
Borrower to be reviewed by the Bank. 
• 
Bi annual report of all complaints 
received, and action taken.   
During Project 
Implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB 
5. 
Due to security 
challenges and weak 
public-sector 
functionality, the 
private sector 
• 
All biding opportunities will be 
advertised on the available websites 
and posted on widely circulated 
national gazette.  
During project 
implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 of 72  
     
 
No 
Risk Description 
Description of Mitigation Measures 
Timeframe 
Responsibility 
participation and 
efficiency would be 
limited, and this 
affects the supply 
market functionality.  
6. 
Need for systematic 
filing system to have 
complete records of 
the procurement 
processes 
• 
Staff training on record keeping and 
establishment of a satisfactory filing 
system 
• 
All 
implementing 
agencies 
will 
maintain all procurement records 
duly catalogued and indexed that will 
facilitate easy access to information.  
During Project 
Implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities 
7. 
Fraud and 
Corruption risks 
(including collusion 
and outside 
interference in 
contracting process 
• 
Disclosure of procurement plan. 
• 
 Disclosure of contract awards and 
creating awareness on effects of 
fraud and corruption 
• 
Prior 
review 
of 
all 
contracts 
regardless of the value. 
During project 
implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB 
8. 
Use of unqualified 
and inexperienced 
evaluation members 
and varying of the 
evaluation criteria 
through elimination 
or skewed sub-
criteria. 
• 
Use of qualified and experience 
sector relevant evaluation panel who 
have the time as well to undertake 
the evaluation within the possible 
shortest 
time 
and 
ensure 
confidentiality. 
• 
Use of clearly defined evaluation 
criteria established in the Bidding 
documents without varying to skew. 
• 
Training of the evaluation members 
on carrying out Bid evaluations.  
During project 
implementation 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo, Baidoa 
Municipalities and 
PCU/WB 
9. 
Inadequate capacity 
by the PIUs to 
supervise/manage 
contracts 
• 
Recruitment 
of 
an 
engineering 
supervision 
consultant 
firm 
to 
support 
the 
PIU 
in 
contract 
management.  
• 
Key 
staff 
involved 
in 
project 
implementation 
will 
undergo 
contract management training to 
enhance their capacity.  
Within 6 months 
of project 
effectiveness.  
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB 
10
Inefficiencies and 
delays in 
procurement process  
• 
Regular monitoring through PP  
During project 
implementation. 
BRA, Garowe, 
Kismayo and 
Baidoa 
Municipalities/WB
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 of 72  
     
 
34. Thresholds for procurement approaches and methods: 
 
Table 1.2. Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods 
 
Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods (US$ millions)–Goods, Works, and Non-
Consulting Services  
Category 
Prior Review 
(US$ millions) 
Open 
International 
Open 
National 
Request for 
Quotation 
(RfQ) 
Works 
All 
≥ 5.0 
< 5.0 
≤ 0.2 
Goods, IT, and non-
consulting services 
All 
≥ 0.5 
< 0.5 
≤ 0.1 
Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods (US$, millions) – Consulting Services  
Category 
Prior Review 
(US$, millions) 
Short List of National Consultants 
Consulting Services 
Engineering and 
Construction Supervision 
Consultants (Firms) 
All 
≤ 0.1 
≤ 0.2 
Individual 
Consultants 
All 
n.a. 
n.a. 
 
 
Financial Management 
 
35. 
The financial management residual risk is assessed as Substantial. Financial management capacity 
challenges that are likely to affect the project do exist. This includes weak PFM legal framework including 
rudimentary inter-governmental fiscal relations between the federal Government and regional member 
states as well as regional member states and municipalities, inadequate financial management 
competencies and internal controls, rudimentary banking arrangements amongst others. Various 
mitigating measures are designed specific to the project and as part of other Bank/Donor engagements in 
the country. Given the consideration for UCS, the project will adopt the UCS in various aspects of the 
projects financial management including for accounting and reporting, banking, oversight arrangements 
with the Office of the Auditor General and staffing. This will be supported by TA with clear requirement 
for knowledge transfer incorporated in the Terms of Reference. The project would also focus on 
developing financial management capacity as part of the project activities. The Project will be supported 
by the existing PIU arrangements for the on-going SUIPP and the EAFS Units that have benefited from 
various fiduciary trainings. Overall the financial management arrangements are acceptable for the 
implementation of this operation.  A detailed description of the project FM arrangements is detailed in 
this assessment.  
 
36. 
Background. The 2006–2007 Joint Needs Assessment of PFM systems in Somalia indicated that 
‘systems that manage public resources are weak’. The FGS PFM Reform Action Plan (2016-2020) 
recognizes the PFM systems that manage public resources are weak. While recognizing this, the Bank will 
work closely with the government to support and strengthen the use of country systems without creating
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 of 72  
     
 
parallel arrangements and in line with the provisions of the ‘Somalia New Deal’. The FM arrangements 
will be continuously monitored through frequent FM supervisions and updated to reflect the emerging 
issues in the FM systems.  
 
37. 
The overarching objective of the project is to strengthen government effectiveness by improving 
municipal governance and urban resilience through the construction and reconstruction of urban 
infrastructure. The public works are expected to generate short-term labour opportunities and improve 
connectivity for the urban poor, IDPs and returnees. The project contributes to the WBG’s twin goals of 
eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity through provision of much-needed economic 
infrastructure for some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people.  The project is also aligned to 
the priorities of the ongoing Systematic Country Diagnostic for Somalia.  
 
38. 
The project will support the rehabilitation of secondary roads across in Mogadishu (FGS) and 
Garowe (Puntland) as well as provide capacity building support to the BRA and Garowe Municipality to 
enable the municipalities to carry out its mandate. The achievement of the above objective would support 
the Governments’ efforts to demonstrate visible and tangible improvements in the lives of its citizens, 
critical for strengthening the legitimacy of the government and sustaining social and political stability in 
the country. 
 
39. 
Country Context. A key PFM finding of the 2006-2007 Joint Needs Assessment (JNA) of PFM 
systems in Somalia40 was that ‘systems that manage public resources are weak’. Similarly, the April 2013 
PFM self-assessment which focused mainly on the federal government PFM activities revealed serious 
capacity weaknesses like those identified by the JNA. However, in furtherance to the Paris Declaration on 
Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States and Situations 
(2007), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-
operation (July 2012), there is deliberate effort as part of the New Deal 'FOCUS' and 'TRUST' principles to 
use country systems. The underlying principle is ‘country-ownership’ anchored in the “strengthened PFM 
approach” – a common framework that has been widely agreed among the Bank and development 
partners, and is in line with the Bank’s overall approach to strengthening its PFM work. 
 
40. 
Project Financial Management Arrangements. Dedicated financial management units otherwise 
referred to as the EAFS are operational in Mogadishu, Puntland, Jubbaland and South West State. The key 
focus of the EAFS units is to ensure harmonization, donor co-ordination, reduce duplication, 
fragmentation and proliferation of donor funded projects. The EAFS units in consultation with the PIUs 
across the regions (FGS, Puntland, Jubbaland, South West State) will have overall day-to-day management 
of the project financial management arrangements.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
40 jointly carried out by the Transitional Federal Government, the United Nations and the World Bank
=== PAGE 63 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 of 72  
     
 
Figure 1.2: Typical Federal EAFS FM Functional Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41. 
Budgeting. In both FGS and each region (BRA, Puntland, Jubbaland, South West State), the 
PIUs/Municipalities will work closely with each of the respective EAFS units to prepare and submit the 
project annual work plan; budget and cash flow forecast. The annual work plans and the cash forecast will 
be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance before the final estimates are incorporated in the 
annual appropriation budgets.   The work plans, cash flow projections and budget will include the figures 
for the year segregated by months and quarters. The cash forecasts will reflect the detailed specifications 
for project activities, schedules (including procurement plan), and anticipated expenditures. Budget 
utilization reports shall be prepared from the financial management system as part of the internal 
government(s) periodic reports as well as quarterly reports submitted to the World Bank. 
 
42. 
 Accounting. The project expenditures will be recognized, captured, analyzed, summarized and 
reported on cash basis.  These will be supported with appropriate records and documentation to track 
commitments and to safeguard assets. The project budgets and expenditure will be classified to facilitate 
the preparation of relevant reports and financial Statements, including information on total project 
expenditures; total expenditure on each project component/activity, and analysis of that total 
expenditure into various categories of goods, training, consultants and other procurement and 
disbursement categories. The project financial management arrangements at the PIU will be outlined in 
Accountant General 
Transactions 
approval 
Approval by Director General 
MoF 
Head of External Assistance Fiduciary 
Section (EAFS)  
Transactions 
authorization 
Countersigned by the 
project coordinators
Head of Accounting Section  
Head of Procurement Section  
 
Project Accountant(s) 
Procurement Specialist 
Finance Officers 
Administrative 
Assistant 
Transaction  
Processing  
Procurement Officers 
Supervisory 
controls 
Verification 
controls 
Technical Assistance 
Internal Audit  
Independent Monitoring 
SURP PIUs/PCU
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 of 72  
     
 
the Project Implementation Manual whereas those relate to EAFS FM activities are outlined in the 
respective EAFS Manuals. The project accounting will cover all project funds and any other contributions 
under the project.  Accounting records will be maintained in USD. The respective EAFS units in 
consultation with the PIUs will ensure that:  
 
(i) 
All important business and financial processes are adhered to; 
(ii) Adequate internal controls and procedures are in place; 
(iii) Interim un-audited Financial Reports (IFRs) are prepared on a timely basis; 
(iv) The financial statements are prepared on a timely basis and in accordance with International Public 
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS cash-basis); 
(v) The external audit is completed on time and audit findings and recommendations/ issues raised in 
the management letter are implemented expeditiously. 
 
43. 
Standard Chart of Accounts will be used to map the project activities into the bespoke financial 
management information system to facilitate the preparation of relevant reports and financial 
statements, including information on total project expenditures; component/sub-components, categories 
and economic items (object codes) among other essential dimensional analysis. All the project financial 
management records will be maintained through the system. Key modules of the Financial Management 
Information System (FMIS) have been tested and implemented at the federal level and plans are 
underway to roll out the system to the States.  In the interim financial management records and reports 
for the States implemented components will be maintained through use of excel worksheet and be phased 
out once the financial management system is in place. The EAFS Manual describes requirements regarding 
accountability of all funds for all components. Eligibility of expenditures will be based on the actual 
amount expended evidenced by appropriate supporting documents. 
 
44. 
Internal Control and Internal Auditing. The project EAFS Manuals and SUIPP PIM provides for the 
relevant internal control procedures and acceptable control procedures for approval and payment 
processes. The PIM will outline specific internal controls related to internal and independent review and 
approval of works interim payments certificates, authentication and management of contracts security 
documents, calculation and retirement of retention amounts as well as measures to mitigate potential 
penalties. The EAFS units and PIUs will also ensure that the contracts are consistent with the invoices and 
payment request before processing. They will also monitor and report on the utilization of project funds, 
including the fiduciary standards complied with and the reliability of the FM systems. The Fixed Assets 
Register relating to the project will be prepared and regularly updated. Physical verification of outputs 
and assets will be carried out periodically – at least once every year. The Fixed Assets Register will reflect 
details of suppliers, description and location of goods, original cost, disposal of assets, asset reference 
(identification) number; Serial or registration number; date of purchase, price (cost) and/or valuation, 
additions to the asset; condition of asset, useful life and residual value; disposal. A Contracts Register will 
also be maintained in respect of all contracts with consultants, contractors and suppliers. The EAFS units 
will prepare Contract Status Reports quarterly as part of the IFRs. Control procedures over fixed assets 
and contracts management will be the responsibility of the PFMRCU.  
 
45. 
Financial Reporting Arrangements. Quarterly IFRs will be prepared by the EAFS and will cover all 
project funds for monitoring the implementation of the project and submitted to the Bank within 45 days 
of the end of each fiscal quarter but the periodicity shall be revised based on project fiduciary risk rating.
=== PAGE 65 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 of 72  
     
 
The IFRs will cover all funds received for the project as well as counterpart or government funds received 
under the project, if any. A template for this report will be agreed upon between MoF, EAFS and the Bank. 
 
46. 
Each of the EAFS units in consultation with the respective PIUs will be responsible for providing 
overall consolidated financial reports as defined in the relevant covenants. The accounting system to be 
put in place will ensure that financial reports will be designed to provide relevant and timely information 
to the project management, implementing agencies, and various stakeholders monitoring the project’s 
performance. All the original financial records shall be maintained at the EAFS Units. The EAFS will 
maintain adequate filing and archival system of all accounting and relevant supporting documents for 
review by the Bank’s FM team during supervision mission and for audit purposes. The EAFS units will also 
prepare annual financial statements (AFS) for the entire project. The content of the statements will be 
documented in the Audit ToRs to be agreed between the Bank and the Government. The Annual Financial 
Statements (AFS) will be prepared in accordance with Cash Basis International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS). The AFS shall include adequate notes and disclosures consistent with the cash basis of 
financial reporting under the IPSAS. 
 
47. 
External Auditing. The Offices of the Auditor General at the federal and in each of the regional 
States will have the constitutional responsibility to carry out independent audit of the project components 
implemented at the federal and State levels.  The project will allocate adequate funds to support the 
engagement of an external audit technical assistance to work with the staff of the respective Offices of 
the Auditor General with special reference to International Standards on Auditing (ISA 800) - Auditor’s 
Report on Special Purpose Audit Engagements. The audited project annual financial statements, 
management letters together with any additional information required will be submitted to the Bank 
within six months after the end of the financial year. The audits shall be in conformity with the Bank’s 
audit requirements and in accordance with internationally recognized auditing standards. The respective 
Offices of the Auditor General will express an opinion on the Financial Statements in compliance with 
International Standards for Supreme Audit Institutions; and also prepare a Management Letter giving 
observations and comments, and providing recommendations for improvements in accounting records, 
systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the Grant Agreement(s).  
 
48. 
Fraud and Corruption. Possibility of circumventing the internal control system with colluding 
practices such as bribes, abuse of administrative positions is a critical issue and may include: (a) complex 
accounting and internal controls inherent with the construction work contracts in particular management 
of contracts security documents, retentions, penalties and payments certificates; (b) poor filing and 
records; (c) nascent intergovernmental fiscal relations between FGS, States and Municipalities; (d) lack of 
budget discipline; (e) unauthorized commitment to suppliers, bypassing budget and expenses vetting 
procedures; (f) uncertainty over the banking arrangements supporting the project; g) potential exposure 
to money laundering; and h) insecurity and political instability. These are mitigated as follows: (i) specific 
aspects on corruption auditing would be included in the external audit and monitoring arrangements ToR; 
(ii) FM Procedures (as part of EAFS Manual and PIM) approved and in operation for the project; (iii) strong 
FM arrangements (including qualified Project Accountants in the EAFS Units; (iv) periodic IFRs including 
budget execution and monitoring; (v) measures to improve social accountability and transparency are 
built into the project design by ensuring that project reports are available to the public; and vi) Annual 
PFM forums will be held. The external audit will pay special attention to the risks of material misstatement 
of the financial statements due to fraud, in line with International Standards on Auditing 240: "The
=== PAGE 66 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 of 72  
     
 
auditor’s responsibilities relating to fraud in an audit of financial statements"). 
 
49. 
Flow of Funds and Banking Arrangements. The project shall open three Designated Accounts 
(DAs) in bank(s) acceptable to the World Bank for components implemented in FGS & FMS and Puntland. 
All the expenditures incurred through the DAs and as well as those submitted to the World Bank for direct 
payments will be justified, supported and eligible as defined in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and 
the Grant Agreement(s).  All project withdrawal applications to the Bank will be made in USD and will be 
submitted online through client connection.  Replenishment and reimbursement Withdrawal Applications 
will be accompanied by Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) in accordance with the procedures established 
in the disbursement Letter and the Bank’s Disbursement Guidelines. Detailed disbursement arrangements 
will be documented in the Disbursement Letters. The PIUs, EAFS Units in consultation with the respective 
Offices of the Accountant General will institute adequate controls in the management of the DAs.  The 
signatories to the DAs (Treasury Cheques/Payment Instructions/Electronic Funds Transfer) and 
Withdrawal Applications will include at least two bank account signatories’ categories (either from each 
panel must sign) in each of the following panels at the Federal level and Puntland: 
 
DA Signatories 
Federal Government 
• 
Panel A: Director General of MoF (with Director of Administration as alternate)  
• 
Panel B: Accountant General (with Deputy Accountant General as alternate) 
 
Garowe, Puntland State/ Baidoa, South West State/Kismayo, Jubbaland State 
• 
Panel A: Director General (with Deputy as alternate)  
• 
Panel B: Accountant General or Treasury Director (with Deputy Accountant General or Deputy 
Treasury Director as alternate) 
 
50. 
The PIUs will prepare detailed cash flow projections segregated into activities for which funds 
shall be paid as a) direct payments b) from the DA c) operating costs. Payments from the PAs shall be 
limited to operational activities. Disbursement of funds from the Designated Accounts (DAs) to the Project 
Accounts (PAs) shall be based on Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) to be prepared by the PIU and 
submitted to the EAFS Unit on a periodic basis. The statements of expenditures shall be supported by a 
PA ledger transaction listing, bank reconciliation statements and a bank reconciliation statement. 
Management of the project account procedures shall be detailed in the PIM and EAFS Manuals.
=== PAGE 67 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 62 of 72  
     
 
Figure 1.3: Funds flow process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51.  Each of the EAFS will maintain: 
(i) A DA in US Dollar (USD) for the project component in a financial institution acceptable to the 
Bank. The ceiling of the DA will be based on cash flow projections.  
(ii) Project component funds will be transferred into the DA against an approved Withdrawal 
Application to be prepared by the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS).  Subsequent 
withdrawals will be based on SOE and after the change to report-based disbursement, based on 
the actual amount expended with a forecast of expenditure and cash flow needs for the next six 
months.  
(iii) Detailed disbursement arrangements will be documented in the Disbursement Letter.  
 
Table 1.3. Financial Management Action Plan 
Action 
Responsibility Due Date 
PIU to recruit per PIU and Public Financial Management Specialist  
PIUs 
Completed 
PIU to update the SUIPP PIM to integrate specific financial 
management arrangements for the SURP II  
PIUs 
Within 90 
days of 
Direct Payments 
Payments 
Transfers 
Federal Member States- EAFS 
Units  
Banking 
Data
Banking 
Data
Payments 
Payment Requests & Reports 
Funds disbursements 
MPF/ IDA 
World Bank 
EAFS Unit within FGS/PL  
(Office of the Accountant General)  
Withdrawal applications  
Vendor & salary payments  
Project Account 
(Federal 
Member States) 
DA 2 
DA 1 
DA 3
=== PAGE 68 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 of 72  
     
 
effectiveness 
PCU to recruit a qualified Financial Management Specialist  
PCU 
Within 6 
months of 
effectiveness 
 
52. 
Conclusion and FM Supervision Plan. The financial management risk for the project is high. Given 
the consideration for use of country systems (UCS) despite the capacity weaknesses identified in the 
assessment, there will be intensive on-site visits in the first year of implementation with due consideration 
to the security situation in the country, to ascertain continued adequacy of arrangements. This will be 
supplemented by desk reviews of IFRs, independent monitoring and annual audit. The FM supervision 
missions will be planned jointly with the general project supervision mission and the objectives will include 
ensuring that strong financial management systems are maintained for the project throughout project 
life.  In adopting a risk-based approach to FM supervision, the key risk areas of focus will include assessing 
the accuracy and reasonableness of budgets, their predictability and budget execution, compliance with 
payment and funds disbursement arrangements, ex-ante and post ante internal controls as well as key 
risk areas.   
 
Table 1.4. Risk Assessment Table 
Type of Risk 
Residual Risk Rating 
Brief Explanation of Changes and any New Mitigation 
Measures 
Previous 
Current 
 
INHERENT RISK 
Country Level 
N/A 
H 
The country level risk is high due to lack of PFM systems and 
legal PFM framework.  
Entity Level 
N/A 
S 
The intergovernmental fiscal relations and PFM accountability 
mechanisms between the respective Ministries of Finance and 
the Municipalities require continuous monitoring and 
strengthening.  
Program Level 
N/A 
S 
Integration of the Project FM arrangements with the 
Municipalities Internal control mechanism to enhance internal 
control effectiveness and efficiency.  This is the first time the 
authorities are implementing a Bank supported project in the 
last 2.5 decades.  
OVERALL INHERENT RISK 
N/A 
S 
 
 
CONTROL RISK 
Budgeting 
N/A 
S 
Integration of the project budgets with the Government and 
municipalities appropriations.     
Accounting 
N/A 
S 
All the project transactions are recognized, captured, analyzed, 
summarized and reported using the Government systems. The 
PIUs and EAFS staff need to take over the end to end financial 
management processes. For Puntland, the accounting function 
to be migrated to FMIS once rolled out. 
Internal controls 
N/A 
S 
The EAFS manual and PIMs will periodically be reviewed to
=== PAGE 69 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 64 of 72  
     
 
Type of Risk 
Residual Risk Rating 
Brief Explanation of Changes and any New Mitigation 
Measures 
Previous 
Current 
consider the emerging FM issues.   
Funds Flow 
N/A 
H 
The country is characterized by an unregulated rudimentary 
banking sector. However, the project is riding on already 
existing banking arrangements established under other Bank 
led projects.  However, there is a potential risk due to the 
rudimentary unregulated banking systems in the country. The 
funds flow arrangements found to be functioning adequately.  
Financial Reporting 
N/A 
S 
The EAFS will work in close consultation with the PIU to ensure 
the IFRs are submitted to the Bank on time. In addition, the 
Bank FM team will undertake periodic FM trainings to 
continuously build the FM capacity of the EAFS and the PIUs.  
Auditing 
N/A 
S 
TOR for the external audit TA support and IPSAS Cash Basis 
formats provided to facilitate preparation of IPSAS compliant 
Annual Financial Statements. The project to make adequate 
budget provisions to finance the TA.    
OVERALL CONTROL RISK 
N/A 
S 
 
 
Environmental and Social Safeguards 
 
53. 
Staffing and implementation arrangements. The PIUs set up in Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo and 
Baidoa include competitively recruited Environment/Social Safeguard Specialists. They prepare and 
implement relevant environmental and social instruments and manage continuous community outreach, 
consultation and the GRM. These staff are constantly being provided with intensive technical capacity 
building and on-the-job backstopping support by Bank staff and engineering and supervision consultants. 
The PCU to be established at the federal level under SURP II will also include an overall Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Specialist and Gender Specialist. The PIUs will be supported by a contracted engineering 
consultant who will be responsible for monitoring the contractors of the civil works as well as monitoring 
adherence to the safeguard instruments. The PIUs will also be supported by a third-party/monitoring 
agent, who will provide quality assurance of the supervision carried out by the engineering supervision 
consultant with spot checks on the engineering quality of the civil works and adherence to environmental 
and social instruments. 
 
54. 
Environmental and social instruments for infrastructure investment: The World Bank ESF will be 
applicable to SURP II. While the details of individual subprojects will be determined during the project 
implementation, the SURP II has taken the framework approach during the project preparation. The 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
prepared under SURP/SUIPP with OPs/BPs have been updated and the Stakeholder Engagement 
Framework (SEF) and the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have been newly prepared in compliance 
with the World Bank ESF. Consistent with these frameworks, subproject-specific environmental and social 
instruments (such as ESMP, RAP, SEP and LMP (integrated or stand-alone)) will be prepared, reviewed and 
disclosed before the start of civil works of each subproject. Relevant provisions of subproject-specific 
instruments will be incorporated into procurement documents. Key environmental and social 
commitments of the client have been included in the ESCP.
=== PAGE 70 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 of 72  
     
 
 
55. 
Safeguards approach to TA component. While the proposed technical assistance under 
Component 2 (Displacement; O&M of Urban Infrastructure; and Subnational Governance and Service 
Delivery) will not fund any infrastructure investment, the application of the results of such TA activities, 
such as policy advice, analytics and training events for government authorities, may have adverse 
environmental and social implications. To address such concerns, the ESCP includes a commitment of the 
government to ensure that all TA and capacity building activities conducted under the Project shall only 
be undertaken pursuant to terms of reference reviewed and approved by the Bank. Such terms of 
reference shall ensure that the TA takes into account and calls for application of relevant provisions of 
ESSs and the borrower’s own laws relating to the environmental and social aspects.  
 
Implementation Support Plan and Resource Requirements 
 
56. 
The Somalia MPF will supplement the World Bank’s supervision costs associated with this Grant. 
This supervision budget will be used to establish a core technical team in the region to provide hands-on 
support to the Client, including a TTL/Co-TTL and a multidisciplinary task team. The team will include an 
engineer, environmental safeguard specialist, social safeguard specialist, gender specialist, procurement 
specialist, financial management specialist. Additional specialists required for the TA activities (e.g. Solid 
Waste Management Specialist) will be called upon as needed.  
Time 
Focus of Client Support 
Skills Needed 
Resource 
Estimate 
Partner Role 
First twelve 
months 
• Set up of the PCU at the 
federal MoPW.  
• Carrying out institutional 
assessments for cities in 
Galmudug/Hirshabelle  
• Final selection of ‘quick win’ 
subprojects in 
Mogadishu/Garowe and 
finalization of bid documents 
and detailed designs.  
• Reviewing and finalization of 
bid documents and detailed 
designs for Kismayo and 
Baidoa.  
• Preparation of GBV action 
plan.  
• Implementation of subproject-
specific safeguard instruments 
(RAP, ESMP, SEP and LMP) for 
roads across all four cities.  
• Contracting for civil works and 
engineering supervision 
consultant across all four cities. 
Technical expertise 
in project 
management, 
engineering, 
institutional 
strengthening, 
social and 
environment 
safeguards, 
procurement, 
contract 
management, 
financial 
management. 
  US$850,000 
- Team will 
ensure 
coordination 
with any other 
potential 
SURP funding 
partners 
- The Bank 
team will 
provide 
routine 
summary 
reporting to 
the MPF 
consultative 
group.
=== PAGE 71 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 66 of 72  
     
 
• Managing contractors and 
monitoring the civil works 
• Ensuring continued 
appropriate use of the 
safeguard instruments  
• Capacity building of PIU staff – 
with a focus on FM, 
procurement, engineering and 
safeguards.  
• Define TA activities to be 
supported.  
• Carrying out a baseline survey 
• Engaging third-party 
monitoring firm.  
12-36 
months 
• Managing contractors and 
monitoring the civil works in 
Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo 
and Baidoa.  
• Ensuring appropriate use of 
safeguard instruments in the 
above 4 cities.  
• Preparation feasibility 
studies/designs/safeguard 
documents for second batch of 
subprojects.  
• Setting up of PIUs in selected 
cities of Galmudug/Hirshabelle 
and preparation of feasibility 
studies/preliminary designs for 
prioritized investments.  
• Continued capacity building of 
PIU staff – with a focus on FM, 
procurement, engineering and 
safeguards.  
• Continuation of TA support.  
• Carrying out beneficiary 
feedback survey for project 
Mid-term Review.  
Same as above 
US$1,800,000 
Same as above 
36-60 
months 
• Managing contractors and 
monitoring the civil works in 
Mogadishu, Garowe, Kismayo 
and Baidoa.  
• Ensuring appropriate use of 
safeguard instruments in the 
above 4 cities.  
 
US$2,000,000 
Same as above
=== PAGE 72 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922) 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 of 72  
     
 
• Continuation of TA support.  
• Carry out end-project 
evaluation.  
 
Skills Mix Required 
Skills Needed 
Number of Staff Weeks per 
annum 
Number of Trips per 
annum 
Comments  
Task Team Leader 
30 
8 
TTL based in Nairobi 
Co-Task Team Leader 
20 
6 
Co-TTL based in 
Washington DC 
Engineer 
170 STC days 
6 
Consultant; Based in 
Nairobi 
Environmental 
Safeguard Specialist 
6 
4 
Based in Nairobi 
Gender Specialist 
4 
3 
Based in Nairobi 
Social Safeguard 
Specialist 
8 
4 
Based in Nairobi 
Procurement Specialist 
7 
4 
Based in Nairobi 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
6 
4 
Based in Nairobi
=== PAGE 73 ===
 
68 
 
ANNEX 2: Gender Mainstreaming 
 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II 
 
1. 
Under the General Principles of Human Rights, the constitution articulates provisions prohibiting 
discrimination across numerous categories, including on the basis of gender. The Constitution further 
providers for numerous protections; Women are given the right to education, allowed to work, own 
properties, hold public office, and receive inheritance. The Federal Government of Somalia and regional 
administrations have further demonstrated a strong commitment to addressing key socio-economic 
disparities and factors of exclusion, including through key frameworks such as the National Gender 
Policy and the National Development Plan.  
 
2. 
At the same time, Somalia’s socio-economic indicators remain among the lowest in the world 
for both males and females and gender disparities are stark. Women and girls, as well as minority groups 
and IDPs, confront multiple dimensions of disempowerment and discrimination across most categories 
of social, economic and human development.41 Gender inequality and exclusion are linked to the 
persistence of discriminatory norms and relations, and absence of key resources that collectively limit 
women’s roles outside the domestic sphere and circumscribe their presence and participation in political 
and public decision-making fora.   
 
3. 
Women are important economic actors in Somali society. According to select estimates, Somali 
women are the main breadwinners in 70 percent of families and make up approximately 60 percent of 
business owners.42 Women have made further gains economically, expanding into employment and 
livelihood sectors traditionally held by men, particularly as more women assume responsibility for 
household income generation.  
 
4. 
Despite their increasing engagement in economic activities, women are poorer than men, as 
wealth is unevenly distributed in the household and across the entire economy. Economic opportunities, 
for men and women alike, are also limited. According to the 2019 World Bank Somali Poverty and 
Vulnerability Assessment, only 37 percent of women participate in the labor market, compared with 
58percent of men. Despite the fact that a majority (64 percent) of Somali households report perceptions 
that most or all women can work outside the home, a large number of women remain at home to care 
for families.  The 2019 National Employment Policy attributes the low levels of female participation in 
the labor market to “the patriarchal nature of society and customs which restrict the participation of 
women in a number of areas.” According to a 2016 UNFPA report, the vast majority (68 percent) of 
employed Somali women are active in agriculture, livestock, forestry or fishery sectors, followed by 14.7 
percent in services. Transport infrastructure remains dominated by men in Somalia. 
 
5. 
Even among those engaged in income generating activities, the majority are in the informal 
microenterprise sector, and the women have limited education and lack basic business skills. 
Furthermore, women’s involvement in wage labor is low (33-40 percent) and predominantly 
concentrated in the agriculture sector.43  
                                            
41 Musse F, and Gardner J., A Gender Profile of Somalia (October 2013, updated from the 2007 version) 
42 UNDP (2014), Role of Somali Women in the Private Sector. 
43 Musse and Gardner 2013.
=== PAGE 74 ===
 
69 
 
6. 
Additionally, while women have been moving into economic terrain previously dominated by 
men, there has been little to no shift in men’s participation in domestic tasks.  Women are therefore 
bearing the double domestic burden of earning an income and taking care of the home.  The 
consequences of this burden often fall to girls in the family, who are expected to contribute to the 
maintenance of the home, often at the expense of education and skills development; according to the 
2012 Human Development Report, over 30 percent girls list “work at home” as their reason for not 
attending school, as compared to 10 percent boys. 
 
7. 
Given these persistent gaps and discriminatory norms, there are risks that disparities between 
men and women may possibly occur in the SURP II project in the course of its implementation, in areas 
such as exclusion from stakeholder engagement activities, priority in hiring, pay rates for similar work 
done, safe working environment, health and sanitary facilities in the work place and office and others.  
 
8. 
To address such risks, SURP II will take a number of differentiated measures to include female 
members in stakeholder engagement processes (including consultation events and grievance redress 
committees); provision of job opportunities in subprojects’ civil works; and fair working conditions 
(including provision of maternity leave and nursing breaks where relevant, and sufficient and suitable 
toilet and washing facilities, separate from men and women workers). These measures are also included 
in the LMP and SEF.  
 
9. 
Gender mainstreaming can be incorporated into the project with lessons from the Africa Region 
Gender Action Plan (GAP).44 This plan lays out the World Bank Africa Region’s strategy for addressing 
gender inequality. The plan’s objective is to advance development for both men and women through 
operations grounded in robust evidence and informed country dialogue. 
 
Management of GBV risks 
 
10. 
GBV is widespread in Somalia and considered to be a major obstacle to equality, peace and 
development in the country. Available data indicates that GBV is common in the lives of women and girls 
across the life course in Somalia, with some forms of GBV endemic. Intimate partner violence and sexual 
violence, the most prevalent types of GBV globally, are both commonplace in the lives of Somali women 
and girls, although there is limited data on which to estimate reliable prevalence and trends in 
perpetration and victimization rates over time. Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting has in the past been 
near universally practiced. 
 
11. 
Conflicts, disasters and insecurity have in the past, and continue to, exacerbate risks associated 
with child marriage and intimate partner violence in Somalia. The effects that displacement has on 
increasing GBV risks and rates among internally displaced and refugee communities globally is increasingly 
recognized,45 and evidence points to a similar escalation of violence against women catalaysed by conflict 
and climate-related displacement and associated stressors in Somalia. Child marriage has been adopted 
as a past coping strategy for drought-affected families in response to acute economic insecurity,46  and 
                                            
44 See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTAFRICA/Resources/AFR-Gender-Action-Plan-FY13-17.pdf for more details 
45 Vu, A. et al (2014) ‘The prevalence of sexual violence among female refugees in complex humanitarian emergencies: a 
systematic review and metaanalysis’, in PLOS Currents Disasters: Stark, L and Ager (2011) ‘A systematic review of prevalence 
studies of gender-based violence in complex emergencies’, in Trauma Violence Abuse 2011;12:127–34. 
46 Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development (2017) Somalia Drought Impact & Needs Assessment, Federal 
Government of Somalia, Mogadishu; Girls Not Brides (2018) Child Marriage in Humanitarian Settings, Girls Not Brides, London; 
Myers, J. (2013) Untying the Knot: Exploring Child Marriage in Fragile Settings, World Vision UK, London.
=== PAGE 75 ===
 
70 
 
the altered economic and social dynamics resulting from displacement have been  linked to increased 
intimate partner violence perpetration among displaced populations in Somalia.47 
 
12. 
Conflict in Somalia has given rise to new expressions of GBV in recent decades, in particular 
conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV), with both state and non-state actors implicated in perpetration. 
CRSV was a feature of interstate conflict in the 1970’s, during the uprising against Siad Barre’s regime and 
the ensuring protracted conflicts in Somalia throughout the late 1980’s, 1990’s and 2000s,48 with mass 
rape, gang rape, abduction, sex trafficking and forced marriage all perpetrated by parties to conflict. 
Sexual violence has been deployed as a conflict strategy by armed actors to punish, humiliate and displace 
populations, and through forced marriages based on family, clan or political affiliation, to control women’s 
fertility and reproductive capacities. Women and girls have also been exposed to sexual violence indirectly 
linked to conflict, opportunistically sexually asaulted by authorities, smugglers and traffickers, with 
displaced women and girls used as ‘payment’ for safe passage at checkpoints.49  
 
13. 
Conflict and disaster-related displacement magnifies risks of sexual violence for women and girls 
in Somalia. Women and girls are at heightened risk of sexual assault during movement to new areas and 
once settled in displaced settings. Unsafe environments, eroded protection mechanisms and social 
cohesion, and a lack of safe livelihoods options all increase the incidence of opportunistic sexual violence 
perpetrated in and around displaced settings when women and girls are collecting water, firewood and 
other resources, and when in public spaces and accessing public facilities.50 
 
14. 
Sexual exploitation and abuse of children and women by people in positions of authority and 
power are reportedly common in Somalia, and as elsewhere, linked to poverty, insecurity and impunity.51 
Athough the issue remains under-researched due to the significant sensitivies associated with it, there is 
evidence of high levels of sexual exploitation and abuse by domestic and foreign security forces and by 
civilians.52 Anecdotal evidence from humanitarian and development agencies indicate that sexual 
exploitation and abuse is a largely unreported and significant problem in the country.  
 
15. 
Ongoing insecurity in the country coupled with the increase in climate-related shocks and 
disasters are likely to create ongoing population displacement, further entrenching poverty among 
internal migrants and increasing exposure to GBV risks. Displaced, migrants and women from minority 
clans, or with no clan affiliation, are at particular risk of sexual exploitation and abuse and sex trafficking 
because of the double discrimination they face due to their economic and social vulnerability, 
discrimination and lack of access to protective resources and redress mechanisms.53  
 
                                            
47 Oxfam (2017) Rapid Gender Analysis for Oxfam Drought Response in Somaliland, Oxfam, June 2017. 
48 Musse, F. (2004) “War crimes against women and girls” in J. Gardner and J. El Bushra (eds) Somalia: The Untold Story: The 
War through the eyes of Somalia Women, Pluto Press, London. 
49 Musse (2004)  
50 Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development (2017); Refugees International (2017) On the Edge of Disaster: 
Somalis forced to flee drought and near famine conditions, RI, Washington DC; Human Rights Watch (2014a) Here, Rape is 
Normal, HRW, New York. 
51 See Reports of the United Nations Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict S/2019/280 and 2018/250; Human Right 
Watch (2014b) “The Power These Men Have Over Us” Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by African Union Forces in Somalia, HRW, 
New York. 
52 Human Rights Watch (2014) 
 53 International Alert/CISP (2015); Wirtz A.L, Perrin N.A., Desgroppes A. et al (2018) Lifetime prevalence, correlates and health 
consequences of gender-based violence victimisation and perpetration among men and women in Somalia’, BMJ Glob Health 
2018;3; El Bushra, J. and Sahl, I.M.G. (2005) Cycles of Violence: Gender relations and armed conflict, ACORD, Nairobi.
=== PAGE 76 ===
 
71 
 
16. 
While incidence of GBV in Somalia is a significant contextual challenge, preliminary assessment of 
project-related Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA)/GBV (based on the risk assessment tool) has been 
conducted during project preparation. Given the significant GBV risks and the context of pervasive 
insecurity, the project will adopt a robust approach to address potential GBV risks. Relevant mitigation 
measures to address these risks will be included in the ESMP and other relevant Instruments as follows:  
 
• 
Code of conduct (CoC) for project workers with SEA/GBV-related protections, to be signed 
and understood by all contractors and consultant staff; 
• 
Plan for sensitization/awareness raising for the community and intended training activities 
for workers on CoC and SEA provisions; 
• 
Mapping and collaboration with GBV service providers;  
• 
A Reporting and Response Framework that outlines key requirements for reporting cases if 
they arise and measures to enable safe, ethical, survivor-centered response; 
• 
An Accountability Framework that outlines how the PIU/contractor will handle allegations, 
including related to investigation (in alignment with national processes) and sanctions for 
potential perpetrators; 
• 
Establishment of special channel/procedures for safe, confidential reporting of GBV 
incidence that connect to the project GRM, and enable training of GRM operators on how 
to respond to cases that come forward; 
• 
GBV requirements to be clarified in bidding documents (including requirements for CoCs, 
training of workers, and how GBV related costs will be covered in the contract); bid 
evaluation to include consideration for GBV response proposal; and 
• 
Make additional funds available to implement measures to address GBV and SEA risks and 
impacts that may arise during Project implementation. 
 
17. 
The project will also include provision of capacity building and training of relevant stakeholders, 
including contractors and project workers, in addition to capacity building for government partners. A 
GBV expert will be hired to support the PCU and a technical specialist will also be brought on board to 
support the Supervision Consultant. GBV risks should be monitored throughout project implementation 
through regular re-assessment, particularly as new project locations are determined, and through 
regular monitoring engagement. To this end, a Third-Party Monitor will be hired to ensure sufficient 
monitoring and management of project-related SEA/GBV risks.
