=== PAGE 1 ===
 
                                                   
 
 
 
  
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4224  
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 106.5 MILLION 
(US$150 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR THE 
SOMALI ELECTRICITY SECTOR RECOVERY PROJECT 
 
 
November 15, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy and Extractives Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made 
publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s policy on Access to Information. 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective {September 30, 2021}) 
 
Currency Unit =   US$ 
US$1 = SDR 0.71 
SDR 1 = US$1.41 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 1 - June 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Acting Regional Director: Ashish Khanna 
Practice Manager: Erik Magnus Fenstrom 
Task Team Leader(s): Patrick Thaddayos Balla, Paul Baringanire, Chiara Odetta 
Rogate
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BESS 
Battery Energy Storage Systems 
BOQ 
Bill of Quantities 
BSSF 
Business Services Support Firm 
CCS 
Corporate Communication Strategy 
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component   
CMU 
Country Management Unit 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CRI 
Corporate Result Indicator 
DA 
Designated Account 
DSI 
Design Supply Installation 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EAPP 
Eastern Africa Power Pool 
ENEE 
Ente Nazionale Energia Elettricaia (Somalia National Electric Corporation) 
EPC 
Engineering Procurement and Construction 
ERR 
Economic Rate of Return 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESI 
Electricity Supply Industry 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
ESP 
Energy Services Provider 
ESRES 
Energy Security and Resource Efficiency in Somaliland 
ESRC 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
ESSA 
Environment and Social Standards Advisor 
ESWG 
Energy Sector Working Group 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
FNTC 
Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee 
GCC 
Gulf Cooperation Council 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEEL 
Growth, Employment, Enterprise and Livelihood 
GER 
Gross Enrollment Rate 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
GoSL 
GRC 
Government of Somaliland 
Grievance Redress Committee 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
 
 
 
HIPC 
Highly Indebted Poor Country 
HOAI 
Horn of Africa Initiative 
HOA RISES 
Horn of Africa Regional Integration for Sustainable Energy Supply 
HSDG 
High Speed Diesel Generator 
IA 
Implementing Agency 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFI 
International Financial Institutions 
IFR 
Interim Financial Reports 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IPSAS 
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
JMR 
Joint Meter Reading 
KfW 
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (German Development Bank) 
LMP 
Labor Management Procedures 
LPG 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
LV 
Low Voltage 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoEM 
Ministry of Energy and Mines 
MoEWR 
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MPA 
Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach 
MV 
Medium Voltage 
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
NPF 
New Procurement Framework 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
OE 
Owner’s Engineer 
PAEM 
Pan-Arab Electricity Market 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PforR 
Program for Results 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PrDO 
Program Development Objective 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee 
PSMP 
Power Sector Master Plan 
PV 
Photovoltaic 
RPF 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
SAPP 
Southern Africa Power Pool
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
 
 
 
 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation Abuse and Harassment 
SEAP 
SEP 
Somali Electricity Access Project 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
SESIA 
Sectoral Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
SESRP 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project 
SFMIS 
Somalia Financial Management Information System 
SHS 
Solar Home Systems 
SIDA 
Swedish International Development Agency 
SL 
Somaliland 
SLFMIS 
Somaliland Financial Management Information Systems 
SMF 
Security Management Framework 
SMP 
Security Management Plan 
SOE 
Statements of Expenditures 
SOP 
Series of Projects 
STEM 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Program 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
WDR 
World Development Report 
WtP 
Willingness to Pay
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DATASHEET ............................................................................................................................. 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONT EXT ....................................................................................................... 7 
A. Country Context ............................................................................................................................. 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 8 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ........................................................................................... 14 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................... 15 
A. Project Development Objective .................................................................................................... 15 
B. Project Components ..................................................................................................................... 16 
C. Project Beneficiaries ..................................................................................................................... 21 
D. Results Chain ................................................................................................................................ 22 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners .................................................................. 23 
F. Lessons Learned and Progress and Reflected in the Project Design.............................................. 23 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................. 25 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ......................................................................... 25 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ....................................................................... 25 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................ 26 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY..................................................................................... 27 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) ........................................................... 27 
B. Fiduciary ....................................................................................................................................... 28 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................. 30 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................. 30 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ...................................................................................... 34 
VI. KEY RISKS ....................................................................................................................... 34 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING .................................................................... 38 
ANNEX 1: Description of Series of Projects (SOP) ....................................................................... 50 
ANNEX 2: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ....................................................... 54 
ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................ 71 
ANNEX 4:  Gender Action Plan ................................................................................................... 83 
ANNEX 5: Donor Activities......................................................................................................... 88 
ANNEX 6: Least Cost Geospatial Electrification Plan to Achieve Universal Access in Somalia ....... 89 
ANNEX 7: Climate Vulnerability Context .................................................................................... 91 
ANNEX 8: IFC Support to Somali Energy Sector .......................................................................... 95
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
 
Page 1 of 95 
 
 
 
. 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P173088 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[✓] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[✓] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
08-Dec-2021 
31-Dec-2026 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
Joint Level 
Yes 
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity supply in project areas 
and to reestablish the electricity supply industry. 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions)
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 95 
     
 
 
Component 1 –Subtransmission and distribution network reconstruction, 
reinforcement and operations efficiency in the major load centers of Mogadishu and 
Hargeisa  
  75.00 
 
Component 2 –Hybridization and battery storage systems for minigrids  
  20.00 
 
Component 3 – Stand-alone solar off-grid access to public institutions (health and 
education)  
  40.00 
 
Component 4 -Institutional development and capacity building  
  15.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Somaliland  
 Federal Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR)  
 Ministry of Finance, Somaliland  
 Ministry of Finance, Federal Republic of Somalia  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
150.00 
Total Financing 
150.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
150.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
150.00 
          IDA Grant 
150.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
 150.00 
   0.00 
 150.00 
National PBA 
   0.00 
 150.00 
   0.00 
 150.00
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 95 
     
 
 
Total 
   0.00 
 150.00 
   0.00 
 150.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Annual 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   2.00 
  12.50 
  34.60 
  61.90 
  39.00 
   0.00 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   2.00 
  14.50 
  49.10 
 111.00 
 150.00 
 150.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Energy & Extractives 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
9. Other 
⚫ High 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 95 
     
 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 95 
     
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.B.1(b) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement:   
FGS to maintain a PIU headed by a Project Manager/Coordinator assisted by multi-disciplinary and competent staff 
satisfactory to the Association 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.B.1(d) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
FGS to select and hire, by not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, the services of a consulting firm 
acceptable to the Association in order to perform the functions of the owner’s engineer 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.B.1(e) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
FGS to maintain throughout at least the initial period of one (1) year of implementation of its Respective Activities 
under the Project, the services of an environmental and social development consulting firm (the “E&S Consultant”) 
acceptable to the Association, to carry out the environmental and social monitoring and supervision of the Project 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
FGS to prepare and adopt a Project Operations Manual (POM) in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association and ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance therewith. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.D.1 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Prior to commencing any civils works for sub-project benefiting one or more ESPs the FGSto agree in writing with 
the respective ESPs the terms and conditions for the update of the ESP(s)’ license and/or concession agreement(s) 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.E.of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
The FGS shall select and hire, by no later than one (1) year after the Effective Date, the services of a consulting firm 
acceptable to the Association, to provide business support services to Beneficiary ESPs 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.F.1 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
FGS to prepare and furnish to the Association by no later than October 31st of each yearan annual work plan and 
budget in accordance with the POM 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has established and operationalized the PSC and the 
ESWG, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 95 
     
 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has prepared and formally adopted the Project 
Operation Manual for its Respective Activities under the Project in a 
manner and substance satisfactory to the Association, pursuant to 
Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 to this Agreement 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has selected and hired (and/or seconded from its 
own staff), to strengthen the capacity of the Project 
Implementation Unit, a security advisor with experience and 
qualification and under terms of reference satisfactory to the 
Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has operationalized the grievance redress mechanism 
referred to in paragraph 6 of Section I.G in Schedule 2 of the 
Financing Agreement, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has prepared and adopted/approved a detailed 
capacity building plan covering the applicable ESSs pursuant to the 
provision of the ESCP, and in in a manner and substance satisfactory 
to the Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
No withdrawal shall be made:  
(a) for payments made prior to the Signature Date; (b) under 
Category (2) until and unless Somaliland has: (a) executed the 
Somaliland Subsidiary Agreement setting forth implementation 
arrangements for Somaliland’s Respective Activities under the 
Project (including the flow of funds out of the Grant proceeds), and 
all Somaliland’s internal requirements for the agreement to be 
binding upon Somaliland in accordance with its terms have been 
duly obtained/secured; (b) prepared and formally adopted a Project 
operation manual for its Respective Activities under the Project; 
and (c) established the institutional arrangements set forth in the 
forgoing manual, as shall be required to carrying out its Respective 
Activities under the Project, in a manner and substance satisfactory 
to the Association
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 95 
     
 
 
  
  
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Recovering from conflict, Somalia has been on a trajectory toward political stabilization and reconstruction. 
In 2012, a provisional constitution was adopted, establishing a new Federal Government and seat of government in the 
city of Mogadishu. The 2012 Provisional Constitution established a federal political structure, including a parliament, 
the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), and the Federal Member States (FMS)1. Although not internationally 
recognized, Somaliland has declared independence from Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and does not 
participate in the federal system. Following this political transition, the international community agreed to the Somali 
Compact with the FGS, based on the New Deal, a guiding set of principles for peacebuilding and state building. The 
second elections were peacefully held in FGS in 2017 to establish the current administration. The sustained political, 
economic, and institutional reforms have enabled rebuilding core state capabilities. The FGS is currently going through 
election process for the upper and lower house before embarking on presidential elections.  
 
2. 
Somalia is facing severe development challenges. The country has a population of about 15 million, of which 
roughly 60 percent are nomadic and semi-nomadic pastoralists, and 60 percent live in rural areas. About 70 percent of 
the population live below the poverty line (US$1.90 a day in 2011 purchasing power parity terms), although this figure 
is expected to have increased following a triple crisis of COVID-19, floods and locust’s invasion. Approximately four out 
of ten Somali households are headed by a female and gender inequalities are severe.2  Almost nine out of ten Somali 
households are deprived in at least one dimension of poverty—monetary, electricity, education, or water and 
sanitation3. The country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is about US$5 billion and GDP per capita is about US$3334. 
 
3. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has interrupted Somalia’s economic recovery. The combined impacts of the COVID-
19 pandemic together with devastating flooding and a new infestation of desert locust led to an economic contraction 
of an estimated 0.4 percent in 2020, compared with an initial growth forecast of 3.2 percent5.  GDP growth is projected 
to rebound to 2.3 percent in 2021, based on encouraging performance in the first six months of the year. Bank deposits 
and credit to the private sector are on an upward trend. Export volumes have increased by nearly 30 percent, while 
total imports have grown by 12 percent6. Economic growth is projected to reach 3.0 percent in 2022 and 3.4 percent 
in 2023, returning to pre-pandemic levels over the medium term. This outlook depends on a continued national 
commitment to economic reform to reach the heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) initiative completion point.   
 
 
1 The federal system includes five Federal Member States (FMS) – Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, Puntland and South West and the 
federally administered Banadir Administration.  
2 World Bank (2019) Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment, Washington DC.   
3 World Bank (2019) Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment, Washington DC 
4 Somalia Economic Update, World Bank, June 2021 (Edition No. 6). 
5 Ibid.   
6 Ibid.
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 95 
     
 
 
4. 
The triple crisis of COVID-19, floods and the desert locust infestation have adversely affected firms and 
households. High frequency phone surveys have been deployed to gauge the impact of the crisis in Somalia7. 
Information available at the start of 2021 suggests that 85 percent of households reported reductions in sources of 
income, which has contributed to a rise in food insecurity. However, increases in the inflows of remittances throughout 
2021 suggests that private household consumption may be improving. At the firm level, there have been closures and 
job losses. An estimated two-thirds of firms suspended operations between February 2020 to January 2021. Firms have 
adjusted to the crisis by making changes to production, and ways of delivering goods and services. However, most firms 
expect to return to their normal levels of sales and workforce. This positive outlook is reinforced by an expected roll-
out of vaccinations to protect the population against COVID-19, where an estimated 90 percent of Somalis expressed 
interest in receiving testing and vaccines if provided without cost. 
 
5. 
Electricity access rates are low, and the cost of power is among the highest in the world. The electricity access 
rate is estimated at 35 percent nationally8, meaning that around 9 million Somalis lack access to electricity services. A 
disparity remains between access rates in urban areas (approximately 60 percent), rural areas (15 percent) and 
nomadic households (1 percent) in addition to high tariffs and connection fees which are barriers to access expansion. 
It is also a pre-requisite input for the provision of adequate health and education services, which is often not sufficient 
in urban areas and completely absent in rural ones, impeding resilience to the pandemic, future shocks, and the overall 
human development of the country. The World Bank’s flagship report on Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy 
(RISE, 2020) found that Somalia ranks in the upper 5 percent globally for power cost, and in the upper 15 percent 
globally for power expenditure as a share of gross national income (GNI) per household.  
 
6. 
The livelihoods of roughly half of Somalia’s population are reliant on pastoralism or agro-pastoralist. Since 
2019 the country has experienced devastating floods and drought, as well as locusts, which have left about 5.2 million 
people in need of assistance and at risk of food insecurity. In addition, while Somalia has very low greenhouse gas 
emissions, it is ranked 181 out of 188 countries in terms of its vulnerability to climate change impact9. Somalia’s 
extremely weak health system further exacerbates the country’s vulnerability against natural disasters.  
 
7. 
In March 2020, Somalia qualified for debt relief through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, 
a major milestone that allows resource flows from international financial institutions (IFIs). Reducing the debt-to-
GDP ratio from 111 percent in 2018 to 84 percent in 2020 reopens access to regular concessional resources from the 
International Development Association (IDA) and other IFIs, together with investment of private capital from the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). Sustaining a positive trajectory will require predictable financing and improved 
institutions (among other factors) as numerous challenges prevail, such as weak government capacity, asymmetric 
federal structures, security concerns, human capital deficits, and low levels of state legitimacy. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
The energy sector is beset with intertwined challenges emerging from years of conflict, ad-hoc service provision, and 
lack of overarching regulations. 
 
 
7 World Bank (2021) Coronavirus and the private sector in Somalia: Results from Wave 2 of COVID-19 focused Enterprise Survey, 
Washington DC.  
8 Tracking SDG 7 (2021), The Energy Progress Report, Washington DC. 
9 Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative Country Index https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/rankings/
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 95 
     
 
 
8. 
The conflict destroyed public electricity infrastructure in Somalia. Pre-conflict, the Somalia National Electric 
Corporation (ENEE) was the single public utility in operation, supplying Mogadishu and the main regional centers of 
Hargeisa, Berbera, Burao, Baidoa, and Kismayo through distributed diesel generators and localized distribution grids 
with a combined total installed capacity of about 70 MW and annual energy production of about 250 GWh (1987). 
However, public electricity infrastructure was destroyed during the conflict, and the associated public institutional 
frameworks are almost completely defunct at present. ENEE currently operates only 14 MW installed capacity in 
Boosaaso and Qardho in the northeastern part of the country.  Private sector has stepped in to provide access to 
electricity, although this is limited to mainly urban areas. The energy sector in Somalia has many features common to 
countries in or emerging from conflict, whereby several private service providers stepped in by creating small electricity 
companies called energy service providers (ESPs). The most common supply of electricity in such contexts is a 
decentralized, private supply of electricity using relatively low-capacity medium voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV) 
networks with embedded small-scale high-speed diesel generators (HSDGs), initially serving their own loads and 
gradually expanding to serve neighborhoods. 
 
9. 
The electricity system in Somalia comprises isolated diesel-based minigrids operated by ESPs on the basis of 
licenses issued by ministries of energy10. The system of delivering electrical energy to users comprises a network of 
isolated distribution grids with embedded generation. These island networks are the property of ESPs, each of which 
owns and operates its independent generation-distribution-customer revenue chain. The ESPs supply more than 90 
percent of the electricity in the country, and it is estimated that there are at least 55 operators in the large cities and 
towns. Some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) also contribute to Somalia’s power supply but at a smaller scale. 
The total estimated installed capacity in the major load centers is about 138 MW (2020) (Table 1)11, which is inadequate 
to serve current and future demand, estimated to increase to between 1,000 MW to 4,600 MW by 203712. This has led 
to a highly fragmented private electricity sector throughout the country, resulting in an inefficient and expensive supply 
given the lack of economies of scale. Thus, with the ongoing initiatives to enact the sector laws, substantial efforts are 
needed to operationalize an enabling institutional and regulatory framework with adequate staffing and capacity.  
 
Table 1. Installed Generation Capacity in the Major Cities 
 
10 The licensing is still ad-hoc at FGS level pending enactment of electricity bill, while in Somaliland there is an interim integrated 
generation-distribution licences with a three year validity period. However, this role has been transferred from MoEM to Somaliland 
Electricity Regulatory Commission.  
11 Electricity Service Providers (ESPs). 
12 Power Sector Master Plan (2019). 
City/Load Center 
Estimated Installed 
Capacity (MW) 
Tariff 
(US$/kWh) 
Lead ESP* 
Mogadishu, Benadir 
47 
0.25 to 0.55 
BECO (Benadir Electric Company) owns about 85 
percent of the total capacity 
Hargeisa, Somaliland 
60 
0.75 
SomPower owns about 95 percent. There exist 4 
ESPs, out of which 3 have agreed to merge further.  
Berbera, Somaliland 
7 
0.5 
BEC (Berbera Electricity Company (BEC) operates 
the entire network that was formerly state owned 
Garoowe, Puntland 
10 
0.79 
NESCOM (National Energy Corporation of Somalia 
the main ESP
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 95 
     
 
 
* There is increasing interest in establishing mergers and joint ventures among ESPs.  
 
10. 
Somali government institutions are in the formative stage with nascent institutional and legal frameworks. In 
the FGS, the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR) has the mandate to oversee operations in the electricity 
sector. In Somaliland, the Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MoEM) has the mandate over the energy sector. At the 
federal member state level, there are also ministries responsible for electricity, although most of these are yet to be 
fully functional. Key sector decisions are made by the MoEWR in the FGS and MoEM in Somaliland. Due to the absence 
of regulations and codes of practice, there is no mechanism to vet and enforce electricity services’ quality or health 
and safety standards, thus exposing both ESP employees and the consumers to safety risks. This is further compounded 
by the lack of capacity to develop, enforce, and monitor the sector by the government institutions. The FGS has taken 
some initial steps to create a favorable enabling environment of policies and regulations that include (a) preparing and 
adopting a sector development plan—the Somali Power Sector Master Plan (PSMP), that aims to have in place the 
fundamental building blocks for establishing a modern energy sector in Somalia and (b) enacting the requisite 
legislation (the Electricity Act). The FGS Electricity Bill and Energy Policy were approved by the Council of Ministers in 
December 2020. The Electricity Bill is expected to be ratified by parliament and enacted by the end of 2021. In 
Somaliland, government efforts have led to the emergence of a nascent policy, legal, and regulatory framework 
through the Somaliland Energy Policy adopted in 2010 and Somaliland Electrical Act (2013), which is awaiting 
parliamentary approval. 
 
11. 
Somalia reports one of the highest costs of power in the world. Considering the major load centers alone, there 
are at least 227 HSDG systems currently operating, with a median capacity of 315 kW. Of these, 113 are in Somaliland, 
28 in Puntland, and 86 located in other federal member states13. These generators are estimated to consume over 
121,000 liters of diesel fuel/day. With increasing demand for electricity, it is projected that diesel consumption could 
increase to 694,000 liters/day in the medium term if additional capacity is to be met by HSDGs alone. This trend is 
changing as ESPs are increasingly integrating renewable energy (solar and wind) in their generation mix. However, 
these are of small-scale capacity due to inadequate financing and limited technical capacity to design and synchronize 
the systems. Based on field data collected in 2017, the cost per kWh in Somalia, excluding Somaliland, ranges from 
US$0.25–US$1.30 per kWh, with a weighted average of about US$0.61 per kWh. In Somaliland, the cost per kWh ranges 
from US$0.30 to US$0.90 per kWh, with a weighted average of about US$0.68 per kWh (according to the 2018 PSMP). 
The World Bank’s Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy (in 2020) reported that Somalia ranks in the upper 5 
percent globally for power cost and in the upper 15 percent globally for power expenditure as a share of gross national 
income (GNI) per household14.   
 
12. 
System losses are high, varying from 25 to 40 percent. Electricity distribution networks’ losses mainly stem 
from the use of LV (415/240 V) as the main distribution voltage, with the lines extending over long distances and aging 
equipment. These losses could be much higher if losses in generation are considered. Technical losses are further 
exacerbated by the ESPs’ duplication of generation, distribution, and retail infrastructure. In addition, the metering 
systems are deficient, and they cannot provide reliable data regarding electricity consumption. In some instances, ESPs 
 
13 South West, Hirshabelle, Galmudug, Jubbaland and Mogadishu.  
14 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/energy/publication/rise---regulatory-indicators-for-sustainable-energy 
Boosaaso, Puntland 
14 
0.8 
ENEE (Ente Nazionale Energia Elettrica) owns 
about 85 percent of the total capacity 
Total 
138
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 95 
     
 
 
charge a fixed fee based on estimation of the consumer load, such as the number of lightbulbs or other appliances in 
use, due to lack of consumer meters. This provides no incentive for end-users to reduce equipment use or buy more 
energy-efficient products, contributing to overall energy inefficiency and driving up electricity costs. The Somaliland 
National Development Plan (NDP) II (2017–2021)15 has set a target to reduce technical losses for each ESP by 7.5 
percent by the end of 2021, through investment in new infrastructure. Investments in the sub transmission network in 
the major load centers are also required to strengthen the current distribution networks. 
 
13. 
Installed generation capacity is inefficiently used. Nearly 100 percent of generation is derived from HSDGs. Due 
to the lack of sector regulations and limited capacity of ESPs to invest in the equipment required to synchronize existing 
HSDG units, coupled with a shortage of operations and maintenance (O&M) staff, most of the existing installed 
generation capacity is not being used efficiently. As a result, “wet stacking” (diesel fuel waste, increased pollution, 
performance degradation, and shorter HSDG lifespans) is widespread. By addressing the synchronization of generation 
units and, ideally, supplementing the thermal units with a renewable energy source, the gains could contribute to lower 
cost of generation by about 30 percent.16 
 
The Somali electricity sector presents opportunities for effective service delivery, harnessing renewable energy and 
building institutions.  
 
14. 
There is significant untapped renewable energy resource potential as identified by numerous assessments, 
including the recent “PSMP (2019) and Renewable Energy Mapping Analysis (2020)”, supported by the World Bank17. 
The country has significant potential for using renewable energy for electricity generation, particularly solar and wind 
energy. However, in-depth evaluation of these resources needs to be conducted before large-scale projects can be 
initiated to harness these renewable resources for power generation. This is particularly true for wind power 
generation, which is site specific. Further, shortages of technical staff, the small scale of the distribution networks, and 
lack of off-transmission infrastructure and associated regulations further limit the immediate large-scale development 
of renewables for power generation.  
 
15. 
The isolated minigrids of ESPs form the basis for an interconnected distribution network to become a national 
grid with the potential for wheeling and cross-network power sales. There is increasing demand for electricity, and 
the required generation capacity for the country is forecast to increase from 1,000 MW to 4,600 MW by 2037 in 
business-as-usual and transformational scenarios, respectively (per the PSMP 2018). To meet the demand, US$3 billion 
would need to be invested throughout the supply chain in the next two decades. However, the absence of an 
interconnected distribution network and a transmission grid in the country, if not addressed in the short-to-medium 
term, will hamper investments and uptake of large-scale generation and new customer connections.  
 
16. 
Somalia, as part of the Horn of Africa Initiative (HoAI)18, can leverage the opportunities offered by regional 
 
15 https://mopnd.govsomaliland.org/article/ndpii-1. 
16 Results from the Energy Security and Resource Efficiency in Somaliland Project indicate that ESPs that have hybridized the HSDGs with 
solar photovoltaic systems coupled with battery energy storage systems have been able to reduce the consumer tariffs by about 34 
percent. 
17 World Bank Group, 2020. Global Wind Atlas. https://globalwindatlas.info/; and World Bank Group and DTU Wind Energy, 2020. 
Global Solar Atlas. https://globalsolaratlas.info/ 
18 The Horn of Africa Initiative was launched in 2019 in response to the collective vision of member countries to deepen regional 
integration and promote regional cooperation.  The member countries of the Horn of Africa Initiative (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, 
Somalia, Sudan) and Pillar I (out of four) of the Initiative focuses on regional infrastructure connectivity for energy, transport, and digital.
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 95 
     
 
 
integration to leapfrog the establishment of the transmission backbone infrastructure and have access to diverse 
and low-cost electricity supply from regional neighbors. The FGS is an active member of the HoAI and has requested 
support under the Initiative to develop the transmission backbone in the country and regional interconnectivity (mainly 
with Ethiopia) in the 2019 communiqué signed by all HoAI members.19 The country has also reiterated its commitment 
to the Initiative during the October 2021 World Bank Annual Meetings. Somalia has expressed interest in joining the 
Eastern Africa Power Pool, and discussions are ongoing. 
 
17. 
Achieving least-cost universal electrification is estimated to require complementary supply solutions of grid, 
minigrid, and stand-alone solutions, as demonstrated by the outcomes of the geospatial least-cost analysis20.  The 
current ESP minigrids (mainly in urban areas) could provide a basis for the extension of the grid to the rural areas. 
However, a combination of high capital costs, timing required to develop and extend a national interconnected grid, 
and rural consumers’ limited ability to pay for electricity services undermines the business case for such an approach 
in the short-to-medium term. Stand-alone off-grid solar solutions and greenfield minigrid developments thus offer 
much greater potential for accelerated access expansion. There is already demonstrated demand and need for off-grid 
solar products, and a variety of companies have demonstrated strong capacity to reach off-grid consumers. There is 
also experience in the country with the development of hybrid minigrids. 
 
18. 
The proposed project is underpinned by a five-year World Bank engagement starting with technical assistance 
and a trust-funded pilot lending operation. The project is informed by critical technical assessments and capacity-
building activities implemented under the ongoing US$7.2 million Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP P165497). The 
SEAP recipient-executed financing by the World Bank is administered by the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund, approved on 
December 21, 2018 with a current closing date of June 30, 2022. The project is under implementation by the FGS and 
Somaliland to reduce market barriers for the private sector to provide modern energy access through solar home 
systems.  
 
19. 
The proposed project is part of the SOP, and a steppingstone to a long-term vision to build institutions and 
regulations simultaneously, with a phased infrastructure investment program for access expansion, clean energy 
transition, and regional interconnectivity. The series of projects (SOP) will enable establishment of building blocks of 
a national integrated electricity supply industry, including the sector’s physical and institutional infrastructure and 
sector operations with adequate capacity and clear roles and mandates for private and public actors. The proposed 
SOP harnesses the strengths of the existing private sector, builds its capacity, and creates a private-public interface for 
energy service delivery. The core proposition of this project is that by investing in sector capacity enhancement and 
network infrastructure, the FGS can leverage the private sector to reestablish the electricity supply industry (ESI). 
Further, the institutional and regulatory enhancement will support the reestablishment of transparency, trust, 
effectiveness, and legitimacy in the government institutions to provide an enabling operating framework for the private 
sector. 
 
20. 
The project deploys new battery and off-grid technologies creating a pathway toward clean energy, 
achievement of the nationally determined contributions (NDCs) per the Paris Agreement, and long-term green 
growth. The project takes advantage of the latest advances in solar photovoltaics (PV), Battery Energy Storage Systems 
 
19 Communiqué signed following side event during the World Bank Annual Meetings.  
20 The FGS commissioned the “Preparation of an Indicative Least-Cost Geospatial Electrification Plan to Achieve Universal Access in 
Somalia,” study implemented by the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2020. The analysis will also be updated to further 
investigate the grid extension options with their interconnection and establishment of a transmission backbone.
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 95 
     
 
 
(BESS), and other technologies and will deploy cutting-edge electricity generation and storage technology that will help 
the local population access cleaner and more affordable electricity. It builds on the experience already acquired by the 
country for both minigrid development and solar PV deployment to scale them up across phases and builds on the 
international experience acquired so far. The project interventions will support the national commitments reflected in 
the draft 2020 NDCs, setting the target of 30 percent greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction against a business-as-usual 
scenario by 2030.  The activities will increase the installed renewable energy installed capacity in the country and thus 
support the “green” transition away from diesel-based generation. The project is part of the new World Bank resilience 
rating pilot and resilience measures to protect and prevent disruptions in physical infrastructure due to climate shocks 
will be incorporated in feasibility studies and detailed designs to be undertaken during project implementation. Lastly, 
the complementarity between the SOP and the proposed Horn of Africa Regional Integration for Sustainable Energy 
Supply project will also ensure that Somalia can take advantage of the benefits of regional integration for accessing 
additional renewable power through imports.  
 
21. 
The project will support expansion of energy access, promote service reliability, and create conditions for 
universal electrification. The project will interconnect and rehabilitate the existing power supply infrastructure to 
optimize existing generation and distribution assets. It will also expand the infrastructure to develop a national grid 
connecting the main load centers. By improving sector operations efficiency, the project and the SOP will support the 
provision of more reliable and affordable electricity services and thus set the stage for an accelerated access expansion 
in future phases of the program. In addition, the program will also support the country in establishing adequate and 
holistic long-term sector planning for the achievement of universal access, based on least-cost principles, with clear 
targets and timetables, priority connectivity to social facilities and for productive uses, and a programmatic approach 
to syndicate financing. Improved sector planning and operations will ensure the sustainability of long-term efforts and 
build confidence in private investors, Development Partners, and establish a consultative sector-wide approach.  
 
22. 
The project will prioritize electricity services to health care facilities and schools as a COVID-19 economic 
recovery response. Over the past year, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented global economic and 
social crisis, significantly affecting all aspects of life. The project will contribute to about 25 percent of the overall 
investment needs to provide access to the rural priority facilities identified by the counterparts, complementing the 
outreach of the Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) and the Improving Healthcare 
Services in Somalia (P172031) projects. The interventions will increase the readiness of health facilities for COVID-19 
response and increase resilience of the beneficiary population. 
 
23. 
The project will closely collaborate with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). IFC will support targeted upstream interventions to augment the private sector 
role and participation toward long term sustainability of the electricity sector.   To this end, IFC will build on the various 
engagements in the electricity sector in Somalia over the past few years21 to focus on the following areas: 
• 
Continue assistance in formulation of enabling laws and regulations, following international best practices, 
including the Electricity Energy Bill (that has been drafted with IFC assistance) and provide requisite capacity 
building to enable an effective regulatory function.  
• 
Provide capacity-building support to the ESPs through focused trainings to implement international 
standards of technical, commercial, Environmental Social and Governance Impact, financial management 
and reporting aspects of the business.  
• 
Given that there is a significant public sector led investment under the proposed engagement, IFC will 
 
21 Please refer to Annex 9.
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 95 
     
 
 
leverage on its experience and knowledge to help structure and design practical and effective interface 
mechanisms between public sector and ESPs based on a fair and balanced risk and return allocation criteria.  
 
24. 
MIGA has actively engaged with potential investors interested in Somalia across all sectors since Somalia 
became a member of MIGA in March 2020. In the energy sector, MIGA has received early-stage enquiries on several 
wind and solar PV projects across Somalia to address regional access and rural electrification. MIGA has now been 
mandated to support the developers of a small solar plant that will supply power to commercial and industrial 
customers, including UN agencies. As the off takers of this project are private, MIGA will not offer its Breach of Contract 
cover, but MIGA’s other risk covers, namely Expropriation, Transfer Restriction and Convertibility, and War and Civil 
Disturbance will be available. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
25. 
The project contributes to the World Bank Group (WBG) twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and 
boosting shared prosperity as well as the UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7. Activities under the project aim 
at expanding access to electricity, which is a fundamental input for socio-economic development, and will establish an 
enabling environment for long-term, sustainable, growth. As such, the project will also contribute to the achievement 
of the broader SDG agenda.  The project is aligned with World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 that 
aims to advance the climate change aspects of the WBG’s Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development approach, which 
pursues poverty eradication and shared prosperity with a sustainability lens. In the Action Plan, the World Bank 
supports countries and private sector clients to maximize the impact of climate finance, aiming for measurable 
improvements in adaptation and resilience and measurable reductions in GHG emissions. 
 
26. 
The project aims to support the FGS’ National Development Plan (NDP) 9 (2020–24)22 that has a strong focus 
on tackling poverty and building resilience. The NDP9 strategic interventions focus on four pillars: (a) Inclusive and 
Accountable Politics; (b) Improved Security and the Rule of Law; (c) Inclusive Economic Growth (including increased 
employment); and (d) Improved Social Development. The NPD9 outlines five strategies for the energy sector for the 
next five years: (a) developing renewable and non-renewable energy sources to increase supply, (b) establishing a 
national regulatory authority for energy market governance, (c) strengthening the administrative and technical capacity 
of the federal and states ministries of energy, and (d) providing access to energy to all populations, including vulnerable 
groups - particularly women, the youth and displaced persons. Somaliland priorities are: (a) access to electricity raised 
to at least 85 percent for 25 percent of Somaliland urban and rural households, respectively; (b) 10 percent of national 
energy generation to be provided by renewable energy sources; (c) a 30 percent reduction in the average tariff; (d) 
increased investment in renewable energy technology, infrastructure, and research; (e) a reduction of system losses 
for energy service providers; and (f) additional generation of 30 MW.  
 
27. 
 The project is aligned with the Somalia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)23, and the National 
Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA)24. Somalia’s NDC target under the mitigation component is to reduce GHG 
 
22 https://mop.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NDP-9-2020-2024.pdf. 
23 “Somalia’s Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC.” 2015. 
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Somalia%20First/Somalia%27s%20INDCs.pdf.; Draft NDC Update, 
December 2020. 
24 Somalia’s National Adaptation Program of Action on Climate Change (NAPA).” 2013. 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/som01.pdf.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 95 
     
 
 
emissions by 30 percent below a business as usual (BaU) scenario by 2030. The destruction of the natural resource base 
(forest and range resources that provide the raw material production of charcoal in Somalia) is identified in Somalia’s 
NDC as one of the greatest challenges and a key driver of recurrent humanitarian crises in the country due to severe 
droughts and impacts on pastoralist activities. The program will help Somalia’s move to greener trajectory through 
utilization of renewable energy, contributing to the reduction of GHG emissions and helping achieve NDC and NAPA 
objectives. 
 
28. 
The project supports the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) 2020–25. The 
strategy centers on the World Bank’s role as a development actor committed to sustained and long-term engagement 
to sector-wide regulatory and policy reform, and more focus on client capacity building and proactive implementation 
support. The project will support the four pillars identified under the strategy: (a) preventing violent conflict and 
interpersonal violence by addressing the drivers of fragility, such as economic and social exclusion, gender inequality, 
and climate change risks; (b) supporting the transition out of fragility by promoting a renewed social contract and 
strengthening the legitimacy and capacity of core sector institutions; (c) fostering a healthy local private sector as well 
as public and private sector solutions to help create jobs, deliver services, foster social cohesion, and promote inclusive 
economic development; and (d) mitigating the spillovers of FCV countries by adopting a regional approach to 
infrastructure development and service delivery. 
 
29. 
The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federal Republic of Somalia for 
the Period FY2019–2225 endorsed by the World Bank Board of Directors on September 25th, 2018; and the country’s 
COVID-19 recovery program. In line with the CPF, the project will support energy access, inclusive social growth, and 
rural resilience and productivity, which are catalysts for unlocking Somalia’s growth potential. The project also 
contributes to a resilient recovery in line with the World Bank–Somalia COVID-19 response program by (a) electrifying 
health facilities, which is a necessary building block toward a pandemic ready health system; (b) catalyzing green 
business growth by increasing renewable energy generation; and (c) supporting job creation in the energy sector, 
especially for female science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) profiles).  
 
30. 
The project supports the implementation of the World Bank Group Gender Strategy26. The gender 
interventions are aligned with the World Bank Gender Strategy Pillars, (a) Improvement of Human Endowments 
through delivery of electricity to health care facilities and schools, (b) Removing Constraints for More and Better Jobs 
and (c) Removing Barriers to Women’s Ownership and Control of Assets. The project design includes targeted 
interventions to improve access to electricity services, improve female participation in the sector workforce, and 
mainstream gender equality across sector institutions.  
 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
PDO Statement 
 
31. 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity supply in the 
project areas and to reestablish the electricity supply industry. 
 
25 Report No. 124734-SO. 
26 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23425?show=full.
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 95 
     
 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
32. 
Progress toward achieving the PDO will be measured by the following project outcome indicators: 
(a) Increase in electricity supply (MWh) 
(b) Generation capacity of energy constructed or rehabilitated (CRI, MW) 
(c) Annual greenhouse gases emissions avoided (tCO2)  
(d) Decrease in tariffs under the project (percentage) 
(e) Establishment of the Electricity Supply Industry institutions with clear roles and responsibilities (Yes/No) 
 
      SERIES OF PROJECTS 
 
33. 
The Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (SESRP) has been conceptualized as the first of a series of three 
projects: (a) electricity sector recovery, (b) electricity sector development, and (c) electrification scale-up. The SOP 
Development Objective is to increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity supply in the Program Areas. The 
vision has four themes: (a) infrastructure development, (b) renewable energy generation, (c) electricity supply to public 
institutions, and (d) sector capacity enhancement. These themes aim to achieve the following outcomes: (i) Increased 
access to lower cost of electricity supply from diverse energy resources especially from renewable energy resources 
for climate change mitigation; and increased access to electricity services; (ii) Improved access to functional health and 
education services; and (iii) Sector institutional, legal, and regulatory enabling environment for sustained sector 
operations, including enhancing both the public and private capacity to manage and operate the sector.  
 
34. 
The SOP will establish a win-win-win relationship among public institutions, private service providers, and 
customers. Provision of basic services like electricity could play a key role in shoring up the legitimacy of the 
government as it seeks to reestablish its authority over the country, and thus the need for effective development 
planning for areas that have seen themselves as marginalized or recently leaving conflict. The project will reestablish 
the mandate of public institutions in the power sector and the provision of public financing to ensure equitable and 
more reliable and affordable access to electricity services for the Somali population. The expanded role of the ESPs will 
help buttress and encourage an increased involvement of the private sector in the long run in both distribution and 
generations subsectors, while maintaining Somalia’s decentralized service structure. In addition, improving electricity 
access and affordability will help the country address poverty through increasing household incomes, as access to 
affordable electricity can create opportunities for the creation of new businesses. Increased and improved electricity 
services provide an opportunity for the FGS to help the population see benefits of the reestablishment of state 
authority with improved service and economic dividends. Detailed description of the SOP is in Annex 1.  
 
B. Project Components 
 
35. 
The SESRP will consist of the following four main components: 
 
Component 1. Sub-transmission and distribution network reconstruction, reinforcement, and operations efficiency 
in the major load centers of Mogadishu and Hargeisa (US$75 million equivalent) 
 
36. 
This component will improve network reliability and operational efficiency by interconnecting the current ESPs’ 
distribution networks and existing generation to optimize overall distribution network operations. These activities will 
support the ESPs to (a) decrease the cost of operations (increased generation efficiency, reduction in distribution
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 95 
     
 
 
network losses, and distribution network duplications) and (b) improve electricity supply and reliability. 
 
37. 
Sub-component 1a: Generator Synchronization and Automation. Currently, most of the ESPs have not 
implemented synchronization and automation as part of their generation processes. Therefore, separate generator 
units are connected to exclusive feeder lines. As a result, many generators operate below their expected optimal 
performance criteria. Further, the absence of automation and synchronization prevents the ESPs from utilizing parallel 
generation to ensure optimal generator performance and dynamic reactivity to electricity load variations. This kind of 
operation results in significant amounts of “wet stacking” (diesel fuel waste, extra pollution, and performance 
degradation). These all combine to reduce the potential maximum generation power output, reduce lifespans of the 
generator engines, and elevate maintenance costs and unscheduled generation downtime. Investments under this sub-
component will support equipment supply and installation that will enable synchronization and automation of the 
numerous generators presently in operation. The investment in each of the targeted major load centers (Mogadishu 
and Hargeisa) will provide reduced cost of generation accruing from augmentation in generation capacity and reduced 
wet stacking resulting in lower fuel consumption and maintenance costs, reduced pollution levels and GHG emissions. 
 
38. 
Sub-component 1b: Sub transmission and Distribution network interconnection in the major load center of 
Mogadishu and Hargeisa. Most of the ESPs with a presence in the targeted project areas operate independently with 
significant infrastructure and operations duplication.27 In addition, lack of network interconnection limits the 
opportunity to share existing generation facilities and the prospect of investing in larger capacity and more efficient 
generation systems. The subcomponent activities will support investments in the sub-transmission, and distribution 
network infrastructure required to enable generation synchronization and interconnection between the different ESP 
networks in addition to increased network capacity and reduced network losses.  The intention to focus on 
establishment of an interconnected sub-transmission and distribution network is deliberate, considering the need to 
consolidate the currently existing investments in infrastructure and concretize the “bottom-up” infrastructure building 
blocks required to meet increasing electricity demand. The increased interconnectivity also provides a better demand 
base for future regional interconnections to the Eastern Africa Power Pool (EAPP). 
 
Component 2. Hybridization and battery storage systems for minigrids (US$20 million equivalent) 
 
39. 
This component will support activities aimed at the hybridization and optimization of existing mini grids. It will 
support installation of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) and Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) systems at existing diesel-
based generation stations in selected load centers. Possible load centers to be considered under this component have 
not been agreed upon, but may include other cities, such as Baidoa, Garowe, Berbera, Bosaso, Abudwak, Afgoye, 
Kismayo, Borama, Burao, and other cities as may be determined by the government. This component aims at increasing 
the efficiency of the existing hybrid mini grids (diesel and solar) by optimizing the generation capacity and, where 
possible, reducing the diesel consumption by augmenting the installed capacity with BESS and additional SPV 
generation. There are several ESPs that have commenced converting their generation systems into hybrid electricity 
generation, mostly via SPV. These systems are synchronized to operate as part of SPV-HSDG hybrid generation, with 
the solar component providing daytime generation. Such hybrid opportunities offer significant improvements in fuel 
efficiency, fuel consumption, extended generator lifespans, reduced GHG emissions, and reduced combustion 
pollution, along with less reliance on fuel imports. In addition, hybridization has enabled some ESPs to reduce the 
electricity tariffs by about 40 percent.  
 
27 There are three major ESPs in Mogadishu (Blue Sky, Mogadishu Power, and BECO). In Hargeisa there are four ESPs, of which three led 
by SomPower are in talks to merge their operations.
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 95 
     
 
 
40. 
Selection criteria. The beneficiary ESPs will be selected taking into account the following criteria: (a) regional 
balance with regard to the project scope coverage, to include some of the large load centers in the FMS; (b) maximum 
impact (reduced GHG emissions) based on the existing load demand; (c) optimized investment costs, for example, ESPs 
with existing hybrid SPV already installed but without battery storage would be ranked higher due to the lower cost; 
(d) availability of land at the existing ESP generation sites for additional infrastructure; and (e) ESPs’ willingness to enter 
into agreement with government on the operations and maintenance of the assets; and commitment to achieving 
minimum performance standards28. 
 
Component 3. Stand-alone solar off-grid access to public institutions (Health and Education) (US$40 million 
equivalent) 
 
41. 
This component complements and expands ongoing activities under the Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP) 
(P165497). While SEAP already provides support for nation-wide solar home system (SHS) connectivity scale-up, 
including for the nomadic population,29 this component will expand activities to target health and education facilities, 
which were not part of the SEAP project scope. 
 
42. 
The component will finance the delivery, installation, and operation and maintenance (O&M) for Lighting 
Global–certified SPV systems over the lifetime of the project for selected education and health facilities. Besides playing 
a key role in enablement of community co-benefits, facilities that have access to electricity may be better positioned 
to attract and retain skilled workers, especially in rural areas. Further, this component will equip public service 
institutions to better respond to emergencies, such as COVID-19. The activities under this component support the 
resilience of the Somali population from the conflict’s impact on livelihoods through improved access to functional 
basic services, such as health and education facilities.  
 
43. 
Selection of the facilities will be underpinned by the Least-Cost geospatial analysis and the list of priority facilities 
identified by the FGS (in consultation with the FMS) and Somaliland.  The overall financing needs for providing access 
to the 4,141 health and education facilities identified by the government is about US$160 million. The project will 
provide electricity access to 585 facilities prioritized by the government following the identification of selection criteria 
agreed with the ministries of energy, health, and education30. Selection criteria include (a) rural and remote areas with 
no connectivity, (b) priority connectivity to maternal health centers and secondary schools, (c) presence of both health 
and education facilities, and (d) presence of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and high levels of poverty and 
vulnerability. The project activities will also be complemented by similar interventions under the Somalia Education for 
Human Capital Development (P172434) and the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia (P172031) projects.  
 
44. 
The component will contribute to about 25 percent of the overall investment needs to provide access to all the 
priority facilities identified. An analysis of prioritized sites suggests that 205 health facilities and 380 educational 
facilities can be electrified with the proposed US$40 million budget under component 3. The preliminary budget 
 
28 These include but not limited to: (i) hours of service; (ii) expansion of service access (i.e. increase connections and area of coverage, 
as well connection of targeted educational and health facilities); (iii) reduction of technical losses; (iv) improved receivables collection; 
(v) reduction of service tariffs; (vi) corporate financial management ratios; and (vii) minimum social and environmental standards for 
service provision and assets management and operation (including operational health and safety standards). 
29 SEAP provides, under component 1—electrification of households and businesses through stand-alone solar home systems (US$3 
million)—results-based grant financing to provide off-grid connectivity. 
30 Prioritization was also informed by the mapping of health facilities conducted under the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia 
(Damal Caafimaad, P172031) project.
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 95 
     
 
 
breakdown is provided in Table 2. The preliminary budget was split in favor of health facilities (US$30 million out of 
the US$40 million for component 3) to emphasize the importance of the health sector in responding to ongoing shocks 
(providing adequate power to the facilities to improve their readiness to respond to the spread of the COVID-19 
pandemic) and to increased resilience in the future. 
 
Table 2. Preliminary estimates of facilities to be connected under the project  
Type 
Number 
Unit 
Capacity 
(kW) 
Unit 
Consumption 
(kWh per 
year) 
Unit Cost 
(US$, 
thousands) 
Total 
Installation 
Cost (US$, 
million) 
Total O&M 
Costa US$, 
million) 
Battery 
replacement 
costb (US$, 
million) 
Health facilities 
Hospital 
10 
148 
518,592 
885,040 
8.8 
0.9 
2.3 
Health Center/Unitc 
170 
10 
35,040 
59,800 
10.2 
1.0 
2.7 
Maternal Health Clinic 
25 
20 
70,080 
119,600 
10.2 
1.0 
2.7 
Subtotal 
205 
 
22.0 
2.2 
5.8 
Educational facilities 
Primary d 
100 
2 
1,444 
14,053 
1.4 
0.1 
0.1 
Secondary 
250 
4 
2,458 
23,920 
6.0 
0.6 
0.5 
NFE 
15 
2 
102 
11,960 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0 
Tertiary e 
15 
9 
460 
5,517 
0.8 
0.1 
0.1 
Subtotal 
380 
 
8.4 
0.8 
0.7 
 
Totals 
585 
 
30.4 
3.0 
6.6 
 
Total (US$, million) 
40.0 
Source: World Bank estimates. 
Notes:  
a O&M contract duration is five years. 
b Assuming the battery pack is replaced during the O&M contract. Assumed battery cost is US$165 per kWh. The size of the battery is 
estimated on the assumption that the battery needs to be able to store the daily expected consumption at a 40 percent load factor. 
c Health centers/units include referral health centers, IDP health centers, primary health units, and IDP primary health units. 
d Primary schools include sites identified as H/Dhexe (Primary and Middle School). 
e Tertiary education facilities include Universities and TVET (Technical and Vocational Education and Training). 
 
Component 4 – Institutional Development and Capacity Building (US$15 million equivalent).  
 
45. 
Component 4 consist of five activities tailored to the re-establishment of the sector’s soft infrastructure for the 
adequate day-to-day management and establishment of an enabling institutional and regulatory environment for 
sector operations. Together, these activities will lead to the rebuilding of the electricity supply industry in the country 
and establish the fundamentals for sector development and private sector participation sustainable in the long run. 
They include the establishment of the institutions with clear roles and responsibilities31, and the development and 
implementation of policies, sector strategies and secondary regulations for the sector. The component will also support 
the implementation of the recommendations provided under the ongoing Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) Institutional 
Design option analysis for sector development and project implementation arrangements: 
 
a) Sub-component 4.1 – Policy and regulatory development. The technical assistance is aimed at strengthening 
 
31 i.e the FGS National Electricity Authority to be stablished after the electricity bill is enacted; and Somaliland Energy Regulatory 
Commission.
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 95 
     
 
 
sector governance and regulation to foster autonomy, accountability, and transparency. Specific activities will 
include sector policy, regulation, planning, management, and operations. This sub-component would also 
provide technical assistance for renewable energy development; and how ESPs would be regulated in the 
future.  
 
b) Sub-component 4.2 - Sector Planning and Feasibility Studies for Renewable Energy Projects. Following the 
adoption of the PSMP, there is a need to undertake detailed feasibility studies, such as site-specific wind 
resource measurements and geothermal prospecting, as well as renewable minigrids pre-feasibility studies 
building on the results of the geospatial Least Cost assessment prepared under the SEAP project. The technical 
assistance will also support MoEWR and MoEM to undertake integrated planning, including preparation of a 
Least-Cost Development Plan covering generation, transmission, and distribution as well as an Electricity 
Access Strategy and Investment Prospectus.  
 
c) Sub-component 4.3: ESP and MOEWR/MOEM Business Support Services. The technical assistance will support 
ESPs to enhance their capacity in utility business management operations. It will also assist them in setting up 
business processes to enable their compliance with license obligations and support growth of businesses and 
revenues for long-term additional sector investments. The assistance aims to enhance and increase the role of 
the ESPs, and the private sector in general, in sector ownership, management, and operations -  initially through 
support and guidance of the day-to-day sector undertakings with a business support services firm (BSSF) 
approach. The BSSF would also potentially promote renewable energy development and/or resilient energy 
infrastructure through capacity building of the ESPs by integrating potential activities such as operations and 
management of solar PV and hybrid facilities and climate and disaster screening and management for energy 
assets.  
 
d) Sub-component 4.4: Project Implementation Support including for environment and social safeguards. This sub-
component will finance execution, design, and supervision consultants to assist the MoEWR and MoEM Project 
Implementation Units (PIUs) and associated agencies in project implementation, sector management, and 
coordination. This sub-component will also support key functions of the PIU project management teams 
(project management, procurement, financial management [FM], safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation) 
required for project implementation. The sub-component will also include technical assistance to enhance 
sector fiduciary arrangements as well as setting up an E&S risk management system, enhancing the E&S 
capacity through staffing and training on the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) requirements based 
on a robust capacity building plan. The Sectoral Environment and Social Assessment shall inform the sector-
wide development framework and E&S risk management capacity and performance for the sector. Specifically, 
the sub-component will finance the owner’s engineer (OE) consultancy services to support the PIUs regarding 
project design, procurement, and contracts’ management, including fiduciary and E&S aspects. A dedicated 
E&S firm will support the PIUs in the areas of health, safety, labor management, land, resettlement, community 
engagement and security. In addition, the sub-component will support other technical assessment and 
capacity-building activities for the successful implementation of the project. This will include, for instance, 
trainings for the Ministries of Health and Education for the management and operations of the SPV systems 
beyond the lifetime of the project.  
 
e) Sub-component 4.5: Implementation of a Gender Action Plan. This sub-component will support a series of 
interventions envisioned to close the identified gender gaps. A preliminary gender assessment was conducted
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 95 
     
 
 
at project preparation to identify specific gender gaps in the energy sector, particularly barriers that limit career 
progression for women. The following activities will be conducted: (a) development and endorsement of a 
detailed Diagnostic Gender Gap Assessment, (b) Pilot incubator for women’s employment, (c) development of 
detailed gender actions plan, including capacity building on gender issues in the sector.  
 
Project Cost and Financing 
 
46. 
The total project cost is estimated at US$150 million equivalent. The estimated project breakdown by 
components is provided in table 3. 
Table 3. Project Costs and Financing  
Components  
IDA Financing 
(US$ million) 
Component 
1: 
Subtransmission 
and 
distribution 
network 
reconstruction, 
reinforcement, and operations efficiency in the major load centers of Mogadishu and 
Hargeisa 
75 
Component 2: Hybridization and battery storage systems for minigrids 
20 
Component 3: Stand-alone solar off-grid access to public institutions (health and 
education) 
40 
Component 4: Institutional Development and Capacity Building 
15 
Total  
150 
 
47. 
Approximately US$50 million of the total allocation will be available to Somaliland to implement activities. To 
access these funds, FGS and Somaliland will need to reach agreement for arrangements for funds flow from the 
Recipient to Somaliland. Disbursements will be made under this Category (2) of the Financing Agreement.  In case these 
funds are not accessed by the time of the Project's midterm review, they will be canceled. 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
48. 
Households. The project will support improved electricity service delivery in the major load centers of 
Mogadishu and Hargeisa and in potentially seven more main load centers for renewable energy generation 
optimization through hybridization of mini grids (component 2). The project will also provide benefits from improved 
health and education services. Overall, the project will benefit about 1.1 million households, equivalent to almost 7 
million people, of which 3.5 million will be females, including those benefiting from improved health and education 
services.32  
 
49. 
Health centers and schools. The project will provide electricity access to approximately 585 social institutions, 
205 health facilities (including hospitals, health centers/units, and maternal health clinics) and 380 schools (including 
primary, secondary, tertiary, and non-formal education facilities). Overall, the project is expected to provide improved 
health services for 330,000 households (about 2 million people), and improved education services for 83,000 
households (about 500,000 people). 
 
32 This assumes 6.2 people per household, an electricity access rate of about 70 percent in urban areas, and a 50 percent female 
population.
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 95 
     
 
 
 
50. 
Sector institutions. In addition to the direct beneficiary households, the sector institutions, including the public 
(MoEWR/MoEM) and the private sector (ESPs), are expected to benefit from the reestablishment of the ESI. Associated 
improvements in the efficiency, transparency, and accountability of the sector operations will not only shore up the 
sector’s performance but also enhance the image and credibility of the institutions and thus build support for sustained 
operations. The project will also benefit the Ministries of Health and Education and their service delivery. 
 
51. 
Increased profitability of productive enterprises and job creation. Improved reliability of electricity supply will 
contribute to increased productivity and income of productive enterprises and thus create opportunities to increase 
jobs for the general populace. 
 
52. 
Improved performance of the ESPs. The project will improve the efficiency in the utilization of the existing and 
expanded assets of the beneficiary ESPs under components 1 and 2. In addition, the whole private sector in the country 
will benefit from the support provided under component 4 for improved commercial and operational performance.  
 
D. Results Chain 
 
53. 
The theory of change underpinning the project is captured in figure 1Error! Reference source not found.. 
 
Figure 1. Theory of Change and Results Framework
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 95 
     
 
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
54. 
The project’s design builds on the World Bank’s experience of supporting local institutions in FCV countries, 
with the goal of preserving local knowledge to improve service delivery and build back better. The project’s focus to 
establish critical sector institutions is driven by the findings of previous Independent Evaluation Group reports and the 
World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development, and it leverages previous World Bank experience 
in FCV situations (e.g., in Republic of Yemen, Iraq, West Bank, and Gaza). In addition, the SOP vision builds on the 
successful long-term engagement implemented by the World Bank in countries such as Bangladesh, Kenya, Rwanda, 
and Vietnam to build and strengthen sector institutions, develop a national power infrastructure, and support the 
electrification agenda. 
 
55. 
Provision of basic services like electricity is paramount to socio-economic development of the country. Thus, 
there is a need to ensure effective development planning for areas that have seen themselves as marginalized for years 
or that are just emerging from conflict. Electricity supports services that are critical for development. In addition, 
improving electricity access and affordability will help the country address poverty by increasing household incomes: 
increasing access to affordable electricity can create opportunities to create new businesses and associated jobs. 
Increased and improved electricity services provide an opportunity to the FGS to enhance its visibility, so that the 
Somali populace can quickly perceive benefits to the reestablishment of state authority as it experiences improved 
service and economic dividends. The expanded role of the ESPs will help buttress and encourage an increased 
involvement of the private sector in the long run in both distribution and generations subsectors. 
 
56. 
Role of partners.  The project and the SOP will establish a technically sound institutional policy, regulatory, 
planning and infrastructure development experience to rally donor’s support for sector development. Several 
development partners are active in the energy access space in Somalia and have been important partners of the FGS, 
government of Somaliland (GoSL), and the World Bank. These include the US Agency for International Development 
(USAID), Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), and the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development 
Office (FCDO)33. Additionally, as project activities will also support the HOAI, it is expected that support from its key 
development partners (European Union and African Development Bank) could also be rallied. The project will leverage 
the existing development partners coordination mechanisms and procedures and comply with the 2015 Paris 
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. 
 
F. Lessons Learned and Progress and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
57. 
Leverage the ongoing World Bank Group Energy Sector program in Somalia. The project is underpinned by 
several years of analytic building blocks and client capacity building. It will complement and leverage the WBG’s past 
and ongoing programs in Somalia by scaling up activities to reestablish the Somali ESI to improve service delivery to 
enhance job creation and public services delivery. Since the Somalia re-engagement in 2013, the World Bank 
established a Multi-Partner Fund, which helped stabilize key institutions and pilot important initiatives now ready for 
scaling up under the CPF covering FY2019–22. An objective of the ongoing SEAP (P165497) is to expand access to 
electricity in targeted urban, peri-urban, and rural communities by supporting activities to reduce market barriers to 
the private sector to provide electricity through solar home systems. SEAP is also financing analytical work to enable 
 
33 Annex 5 summarizes specific energy sector interventions by development partners in Somalia
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 95 
     
 
 
electrification through solar-powered/hybrid minigrids and supporting activities to strengthen the capacity of the 
MoEWR and MoEM for overall energy sector management and integrated electricity sector planning.  
 
58. 
Deploy WBG instruments and inter WBG team collaboration to maximize finance for development. The 
project design aims to establish an enabling environment to both sustain and enhance the ongoing private sector 
investments (ESPs) and create opportunities for their scale-up. IFC is also increasing its engagement in the sector, as it 
presents significant growth potential where the ESPs are targeting to increase their generation, and renewable, 
capacity to meet currently unmet and growing demand. IFC expects its energy sector program in Somalia to evolve 
with a combination of structured financing support and technical assistance to ESPs, helping them meet their growth 
objectives and achieve long-term sustainability with acquisition of industry best practice technical knowledge, skills, 
and capacity and adoption of international Educational Software for Guiding Instruction (ESGI) standards. The project 
design has benefited from IFC upstream support (such as the electricity bills that were prepared with the support of 
IFC), and the design includes aspects that will be complemented by IFC, especially the ESPs’ business development 
support, enhancing the regulatory environment for increased private sector investments, and priority project 
structuring (such as the adaption of the standardized templates for IFC’s Scaling Solar Program). Activities implemented 
by IFC are discussed further in annex 8.  
 
59. 
The design of the project, especially component 2, draws lessons learnt from a recent project - the Energy 
Security and Resource Efficiency in Somaliland (ESRES) that was implemented in Somaliland with financing from 
FCDO. The project piloted initiatives to (a) integrate renewable energy to existing HSDGs creating SPV/BESS/HSDG 
hybrid mini grids leading to reduced cost of generation and (b) support participating ESPs to reduce network technical 
and commercial losses. The project has demonstrated the feasibility of solar power in reducing the cost of generation 
and ESPs’ willingness to provide capital investments into SPV-based generation capacity. The project provided financing 
for nine hybrid mini grids with installed SPV capacity of 5.7 MWp and four BESS systems with a total capacity of 2.6 
MWh. This led to reduced diesel consumption of about 3.4 million liters per year and reduced GHG emissions equivalent 
to about 8,822 tons of CO2 annually, with an expected lifetime saving of 175,000 tons. Eight of nine ESPs reduced the 
tariff by about 34 percent. ESPs also installed capacity of SPV/BESS equivalent capacity of 21.2 MWp in four years. Key 
lessons from the project include the following: (a) ESPs require significant technical assistance to enhance their 
operations and uptake emerging technologies; (b) there is a need to support increased uptake of electricity services, 
especially for productive use; (c) there is a need for a conducive institutional, legal, and regulatory framework for 
sustained operations; and (d) most of the ESPs have a limited ability to raise capital to expand their operations, 
especially in terms of large-scale, renewable energy–based generation. 
 
60. 
Lessons learned from the implementation of the SEAP project have been incorporated into project design. 
The SEAP project has been the first project implemented by the counterparts, and highlighted the need for 
strengthening the safeguards, procurement, and financial management capacity of the PIUs. Critical gaps have been 
identified and included in the design of Component 4. In addition, the project provides technical assistance for 
improved sector planning, which is also been complemented by improved assessments and capacity building under 
Component 4. Finally, Component 3 was informed by the lessons learned from providing access to households and 
Small and Medium Enterprises with SHS systems.  
 
61. 
Lessons from past and global experience on service provision to public institutions were incorporated in the 
project design to ensure sustainability. The lack of public financing for access provision to health and education 
facilities has emerged as a key constraint for scaling up access to electricity services (both grid and off-grid) and for the
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 95 
     
 
 
adequate O&M of the connections provided. As a result, when stand-alone off-grid PV systems are provided with donor 
and public financing, they often end up as stranded assets; lack of earmarked financing for O&M and the lack of skilled 
technicians to operate and maintain the systems are key constraints. This is further compounded by a lack of in-house 
capacity in the respective ministries of health or education to integrate energy planning for functional facilities. These 
ministries have traditionally perceived the role of electricity services provision as an obligation of the energy ministry 
and related institutions—the health and education ministries lack budget resources to maintain the associated energy 
assets and payment for consumption. Though the project will adopt the current practice of access free of charge 
(through public financing), the project will provide training and capacity-building activities to the beneficiary institution 
staff. This will enable the establishment of a workforce capable of managing the systems after the lifetime of the project 
and leading facilities’ planning, operations, and maintenance. The beneficiary ministries will also be required to allocate 
adequate financing to the O&M after the duration of the project to ensure the sustainability of operations. Based on 
the entrepreneurial experiences witnessed in other contexts of fragility, to support the revenue stream required to 
allocate an adequate public budget for the operations of the systems after the lifetime of the project, a pilot will be 
conducted in selected facilities for the provision of auxiliary services. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
62. 
The project will rely on the existing institutional and implementation arrangements established under the 
ongoing SEAP. The project will be implemented by the two PIUs established at the MoEWR and the MoEM, in close 
coordination with the FMSs, the beneficiary ministries, and ESPs. Given the nascent capacity within the implementing 
agencies and PIUs, the Owners Engineer firm will be recruited to support the PIUs in project design, procurement, and 
contract management, including fiduciary, environment, and social risk management aspects, and project monitoring 
and evaluation.  A BSSF with experience in utility operations will be hired by each PIU to support selected ESPs. The 
BSSF will assess capacity of ESP to manage the E&S aspects in their operations and strengthen the ESPs’ technical and 
institutional capacity in key functions of Electricity Utility Business including but not limited to Corporate Planning, 
commercial and network management and operations. 
 
63. 
To strengthen project oversight, an independent monitoring and verification firm will be hired to provide 
independent audits (covering technical, fiduciary and safeguards among others) including assessment of E&S 
performance of contractors and ESPs against the subproject specific mitigation plans. In addition, a Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) will be constituted at the line ministries with high level representation of the Ministry of Finance to 
provide overall oversight of project implementation and policy guidance. The Energy Sector Working Group (ESWG) 
will be constituted at the MoEWR and MoEM level to provide guidance on project implementation; provide a forum 
for sector dialogue, ownership, and accountability among government, the development partners, and other sector 
stakeholders. Detailed implementation arrangements are described in annex 2.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
64. 
The project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system incorporates the PDO and intermediate indicators that 
will be used to track both project implementation progress and attainment of the intended objectives at completion. 
The M&E also includes several sex-disaggregated results indicators to monitor and assess both progress in
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 95 
     
 
 
implementing gender-related activities, including narrowing of identified gender disparities, and project benefits for 
women and men. Monitoring of results will be a key responsibility of the PIUs. The PIUs will be responsible for 
collecting, verifying, and collating information, integrating the M&E reports, and submitting to the World Bank both 
quarterly and annual progress reports. The PIUs shall establish a database for each component of the project to 
periodically monitor the evolution of implementation, outputs, and results, with systems for regular data gathering 
and processing of information required to monitor the main performance indicators and intermediary indicators as 
defined in the results framework. The PIUs shall collect and compile data to provide a basis for a compressive mid-term 
review. The Project Management Teams will also undertake an end-of-term review and write a final Implementation 
and Completion Results Report. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
65. 
The proposed series of projects (SOP) is a steppingstone to long term vision to build institutions and regulations, 
as well as phased infrastructure investment program for access expansion, clean energy transition, and regional 
interconnectivity.  The SOP will enable establishment of building blocks of a national integrated electricity supply 
industry, including the sector’s physical and institutional infrastructure and sector operations with adequate capacity 
and clear roles and mandates for private and public actors, thereby creating conditions to enhance sustainability of the 
sector and activities.  
66. 
The ongoing government-led initiatives to enact the sector laws and the willingness to have an enabling 
institutional and regulatory framework, in addition to the sector policies already adopted, support the project’s long-
term impact and sector sustainability. They address (a) increasing the reliability, efficiency, and accountability of 
electricity service delivery; (b) promoting private sector participation; and (c) improving the sector management and 
performance. 
 
67. 
The multi-pronged approach of the project encompassing both investments to improve the quality of 
electricity services and sector re-establishment for improved operations and sustainability of systems, processes, 
and incentives that will allow electricity services to be provided. By focusing on improving quality, this project will 
contribute to socioeconomic development, firm competitiveness, and job creation over the long term. Efficient sector 
operations hinge on the development of management systems to inform decision-making and put in place the tools 
and processes required to operate effectively. The project-supported sector capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance will help improve (a) quality of electricity services, (b) sector-wide planning, and (c) enhanced role of the 
private sector (the ESPs). 
 
68. 
A key component of the project is the BSSF support to ESPs. It is envisaged that the BSSF will support selected 
ESPs in defining and implementing the business improvement plans, including performance indicators, which will 
facilitate the operators’ ability to comply with regulatory and license obligations and enable them to build the capacity 
needed to grow their business. Over the long term, increased private sector participation will provide not only 
sustainability through efficiency of operations but also the ability to crowd in private sector-led investments. 
 
69. 
The sustainability of off-grid investments beyond the life of the project is at the core of project design. First, 
the off-grid supply solutions are identified based on a comprehensive geospatial plan with a robust approximation of 
consumption points and total demand. This plan will be updated over time allowing a regular assessment of economic 
viability. Second, a contractor will be engaged by the government to design, supply, install and operate the systems, 
especially for the public facilities. O&M services for will be contracted out to ensure attention to replacement and
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 95 
     
 
 
repairs of these assets. The MoEWR/MoEM will handover operations of the systems to the ministries of health and 
education beyond the project period and will ensure capacity is built for these ministries to take care of the system. 
Technical assistance will be provided to the ministries of health and education under the project to improve their 
budget discipline for the facilities’ operational costs and to identify measures to increase their revenue stream, based 
on best practices and in collaboration with the World Bank Health and Education projects.  
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) 
70. 
Technical. The activities under the project will not pose any significant technical concerns. All the technologies 
applied in the project, particularly the generator synchronization, the 132 kV sub-transmission and MV distribution 
network reinforcement, solar PV Installations and BESS have been widely used in other countries with similar 
conditions. Specially, the integration of solar PV/BESS into the existing HSDGs system has recently been undertaken by 
several ESPs in Somaliland under the ESRES-FCDO supported project and thus there is country experience with similar 
technology.  
 
71. 
Economic and Financial. The economic returns are assessed in a standard cost-benefit analysis. Benefits of 
components 1 and 2 are based on the economic value of displaced diesel fuel. Under component 3, the social benefits 
of electrification of health and educational facilities cannot easily be monetized in the absence of reliable health data, 
as a proxy for willingness-to-pay (WTP) the avoided cost of diesel generation that would provide the equivalent 
electricity output was applied.  Component 4 is excluded since the economic benefits of technical (TA) outcomes are 
difficult to monetize.  The economic analysis shows high returns, a consequence of the unusually high cost of diesel 
generation, especially in inland areas. The five-year average of diesel price in Mogadishu is $0.81 per liter, and $0.68 
per liter as of January 2021, compounded by losses in a dilapidated distribution network of up to 40 percent. Diesel 
prices in inland regions have averaged from $0.61 per liter to $1.10 (in the Juba region).  The economic returns are 
shown in table 4. The lowest returns are for component 3, but the social benefits of improved health and educational 
outcomes will exceed the WTP proxy used in the analysis. The present operation of the ESPs is so inefficient, losses are 
so high, and diesel fuel so expensive that even with the application of a 2.5x multiplier over international price levels 
the proposed interventions have much higher returns than in most other countries in Africa. Details of the economic 
and financial analysis are presented in annex 3.  
Table 4: Economic Analysis 
Component 
ERR 
NPV 
US$ million 
1A: Generator Synchronization and Automation 
47% 
52 
1B: Subtransmission and Distribution network interconnection in the major 
load centers  
43% 
370 
2: PV Hybridization and battery storage systems for minigrids 
43% 
63 
3: Stand-alone solar off-grid access to public institutions 
19% 
42 
Project as a whole 
39% 
549 
Including GHG, low SVC 
42% 
608 
Including GHG, high SVC 
52% 
697 
Note: NPV discount rate of 4 percent, 15-year economic project lifetime. ERR = economic rate of return; NPV = net present value; GHG= 
greenhouse gas; SVC = shadow value of carbon.
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 95 
     
 
 
 
72. 
The GHG accounting is integrated into the economic analysis, based on lifetimes of 15 years (corresponding to 
typical 15-year PV warranties). Since diesel consumption (and hence GHGs) is a strong function of loading, the savings 
are based directly on reductions in diesel fuel rather than the usual IFI and Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change 
(IPCC) default values for emission factors. Lifetime GHG emission reductions are estimated at 2.4 million tons of CO2. 
The low and high valuations stipulated in the World Bank’s guidance document increases the economic returns as 
shown in annex 3. 
73. 
Financial analysis. Components 1 and 2 involve ESPs whose financial statements were not available, and thus 
the impact of the project on the financial condition of the ESPs could not be assessed.  However, the approach used to 
undertake the financial analysis was to capture the expected incremental cash flows with the assumption that the ESPs 
will purchase the PV generated power. Such a financial assessment is not appropriate for the health center and school 
SHSs (component 3), which generate no offsetting revenue from users. Real financial returns are somewhat lower than 
the ERRs (attributable mainly to an 18 percent import duty on CAPEX), but highly profitable to the ESPs. Details are 
available in annex 3.    
74. 
Impact of climate change on economic returns and assessment of mitigation and adaptation costs. 
Notwithstanding the high level of uncertainty in the input assumptions, the resilience of the project interventions to 
severe climate change is high. The worst-case climate change scenario does not threaten the economic viability of the 
proposed project investments. Details of impact of climate change and adaptation costs are discussed in annex 3.  
B. Fiduciary 
Financial Management 
 
75. 
The financial management (FM) assessment and the design of the FM arrangements for this project took into 
consideration the government public financial management (PFM) systems in the energy sector. In particular, the 
assessment covered the sector’s planning and budgeting approaches, funding flow and banking arrangements, and 
accounting and internal control frameworks, including payroll controls and the supporting systems—reporting as well 
as external audit and oversight arrangements. The assessment took into account the extent to which the existing 
systems are mainstreamed into the country’s PFM systems. The FM systems and arrangements will include budgeting, 
accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting and internal and external auditing arrangements, FM 
staffing, risk management, and related policies, procedures, and practices. The objective of the assessment was to 
ascertain that the FM systems will facilitate the preparation of regular, timely, and reliable financial statements and 
will support the provision of a complete, true, and fair record of all transactions and balances, safeguard assets, and 
internal and external auditing arrangements, in line with the World Bank financial management policies and 
internationally accepted standards. Detailed mitigation measures are provided in Annex 2. 
76. 
In view of the specific context and operating environment in Somalia, the residual fiduciary risk for the project 
is assessed as Substantial. The Substantial-risk rating is largely attributable to weak institutional and systems capacities 
at the federal, state, regional, and district levels. The policies, procedures, and legal framework needed to support the 
sector are under formulation with support from international development partners. In addition, there are (a) deficient 
human resource capital at national and regional levels; (b) sustainability challenges, as the energy sector is largely 
managed and funded via out-of-country systems; and (c) inadequate resources to finance the sector in line with the 
priorities of the government(s).
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 95 
     
 
 
77. 
The project will adopt the use of country systems (UCS) in various aspects of the project’s FM, including 
budgeting, accounting and reporting, banking, and oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General. 
This will be supported by technical assistance with clear requirements for knowledge transfer incorporated in the Terms 
of Reference (ToRs). Similar to other World Bank–supported operations, the External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
(EAFS) units, established within the Offices of the Accountant General at FGS and Somaliland will be charged with the 
overall project FM for all projects financed by IDA resources whose performances thus far has been satisfactory. With 
overall guidance from the Accountant General(s) and the EAFS units, the respective PIUs will continue to provide day-
to-day FM oversight of the project. The effectiveness of the EAFS units, alongside other key functional units, will be 
continuously monitored, while key areas of capacity strengthening will be identified and supported through the project. 
The existing organizational and functional structure of the EAFS units are expected to be maintained and further 
strengthened to provide effective FM support to the project. 
78. 
All project FM transactions will be recognized, captured, recorded, analyzed, summarized, and reported 
through the governments’ financial management information system (MIS). The EAFS units with support of the 
respective accountant generals will ensure that (a) all important business and financial processes are adhered to, (b) 
adequate internal controls and procedures are in place and adequately enforced, (c) unaudited Interim Financial 
Reports (IFRs) are prepared on a timely basis, (d) all Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) are submitted to the World 
Bank on a timely basis, (e) project financial statements are prepared on a timely basis and in accordance with 
international public-sector accounting standards cash-basis, and (f) external audit is completed on time and audit 
findings and recommendations/issues raised in the management letter are implemented expeditiously. 
Procurement 
 
79. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF 
Borrowers dated November 2020 (Procurement Regulations); the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, revised July 1, 2016; and the provisions 
stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Procurement under the project will be carried out according to the 
arrangements described in annex 2. 
80. 
Procurement implementation arrangement. For implementation of the ongoing SEAP, two functional PIUs 
were established at MoEWR and MoEM. The same PIUs will be utilized for implementation of SESRP. The 
implementation timelines of SEAP (stipulated to be closed on June 30, 2022) and SESRP are overlapping. The expertise 
gained and institutional memory will be beneficial for implementation of SESRP. The PIUs are staffed with a dedicated 
procurement specialist. In both the PIUs, an adequate number of officials dealing with procurement either directly or 
indirectly have undergone procurement training with focus on the World Bank's procurement regulations. Considering 
the increased spending envelope for SESRP and the procurement profile, the staff needs timely advice and support in 
articulating high-value and complex procurement transactions envisaged through SESRP. The World Bank continues to 
review the capacity requirements and staff turnover and provides need-based refresher trainings periodically, including 
training to manage the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) portal.  
81. 
Project procurement strategy for development (PPSD) and the Procurement Plan (PP). The borrower has 
prepared the PPSD and Procurement Plan for the first 18 months with a focus on key procurement activities to select 
the optimum fit-for-purpose method and market approach.
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 95 
     
 
 
82. 
Systematic tracking of exchanges in procurement. The World Bank’s STEP system will be used to prepare, clear, 
and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of the PIU have been trained in using 
STEP. 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
83. 
The project’s Environmental and Social Risk Management follows a phased approach starting with basic 
assessments and then builds incrementally through a sectoral wide assessment commencing in the early phases of 
project implementation. The key E&S risks at the project level that will need to be taken into consideration as detailed 
assessment are carried out during the implementation are security risks, occupation health and safety, labor welfare 
and working conditions, labor influx, waste management, land acquisition and resettlement, legacy issues around 
existing sites of generation and distribution network. Given the low capacity at the FGS, FMS, ESPs, local contractors, 
consultants and other implementing partners, substantial focus will be on building capacity by following a learning by 
doing approach. Simultaneously, support will be provided under the project to set-up an E&S management system, 
policies, guidelines etc. to serve in the medium and long term through a capacity building plan.  
 
84. 
The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), Draft Security Management Framework, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, Draft 
Labour management procedures (LMP), standalone Draft GBV Mitigation Action Plan and draft Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) and disclosed in country on September 12, 202134.  The ESMF includes ToR for Sectoral Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment (SESIA), ToR for Capacity Building Plan with activities, timetable, budget and ToR for 
conducting assessment to confirm the presence of IP/Sub-Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local 
Communities as per ESS7 to (a) determine the applicability of the standard; (b) prepare an IPPF if required.  
 
85. 
Stakeholder consultation were held on April 28, 2021 (Somaliland) and on May 22, 24 to 26, 2021 for FGS 
(Somalia). Additional Stakeholder engagements were held from June 15 to 30, 2021. All these have been documented. 
Once the sub project design is finalized and the sites are identified the PIU will disclose the executive summaries of 
ESMF, RPF, LMP as well as ESMP, RAPs etc, in the respective FMS and district offices in culturally appropriate manner. 
Site-specific environmental and social standards instruments such as ESIAs, ESMPs, and/or Resettlement Action Plans 
will be prepared as required. All ESF instruments shall be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank and publicly disclosed 
for feedback as per ESS10. 
 
86. 
The ESMF covers the environmental and social baseline of the project; a review of relevant national policy; a 
thorough performance evaluation of regulatory frameworks and institutional arrangements; environmental and social 
 
34 The ESCP, SEP and AESRS have been disclosed on Bank website on September 30, 2021. Other documents are in the approval 
process for disclosure on World Bank website
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 95 
     
 
 
risks and impacts and mitigation measures; project coordination and implementation arrangements; capacity building 
and training; the environmental and social screening process; a generic Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP) for distinctive activities of the project, such as sub-transmission and distribution network reconstruction and 
reinforcement in the major load centers, hybridization and optimization (including battery storage) of existing and 
greenfield mini grids developments, retrofitting of existing and new public infrastructure facilities with electricity 
services and support, and TA activities; ToR for the preparation of site-specific Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) and ESMP; chance-finds procedures for cultural heritage; and relevant guidelines (such as solar 
batteries and panels management, a disposal and recycling plan, and environment, health and safety (EHS) general and 
transmission/distribution guidelines); and ESMF implementation budget. 
 
87. 
To further assess capacity at sectoral level a Sectoral Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (SESIA) will 
be undertaken in the early phases of the project implementation. The SESIA will examine environmental and social risks, 
impacts, and issues associated with the energy sector in Somalia. It will evaluate and compare the impacts against those 
of alternative options, assess legal and institutional aspects relevant to the risks and impacts, and recommend broad 
measures to strengthen environmental and social management. The SESIA will pay particular attention to potential 
cumulative risks and impacts of multiple activities. The findings of SESIA will link to the larger capacity building plan 
under SOP 2, 3 and regional project like horn of Africa gateway development project. 
 
88. 
The presence of communities that meet the identification criteria for IP/SSAHUTLCs is yet to be confirmed. 
Consistent with ESS7, the government shall further analyze the application of ESS 7 based on Consultations with experts 
and potentially affected groups and will prepare an IPPF if needed. IPPF will include the screening checklist to confirm 
the presence of this groups and circumstances requiring Free Prior and informed Consent. 
 
89. 
An Environmental specialist and Social Specialist in the PIUs for E&S risk management have been hired under the 
project. An E&S Firm has been hired to provide support in preparation of ESMF, Resettlement Policy Framework, SEP, 
Labor Management Procedures, and GBV Action Plan and provide guidance in early phase of project implementation in 
the areas of health, safety, labor management, land, resettlement, community. The Owners Engineer will be responsible 
for preparing site-specific E&S instruments along with the subproject specific design and subsequent supervision. The 
Business Support services Firm (BSSF), with experience in utility operations, will be hired to support the ESPs in 
strengthening their technical and institutional capacity in the key functions of electricity utility business. The experts 
provided by the BSSF will work as advisors paired to the ESP counterparts for a period of two to three years. The BSSF 
will support and guide the day-to-day sector undertakings over a medium term to reestablish the Somali electricity 
sector covering both policy, oversight, operations and management. The BSSF support will include coaching and hands-
on training of the sector staff covering EHS issues such as: sector governance, development of appropriate regulations 
and EHS standards in safety, environmental, and social performance obligations for ESPs. The BSSF will support ESPs in 
enabling E&S capacity, including the preparation of EHS manuals with a focus on the ESPs’ operations and maintenance 
obligations for the facilities financed by the project. An independent monitoring and verification firm will provide 
independent audits (covering technical, fiduciary and safeguards among others) including assessment of E&S 
performance of contractors and ESPs against the subproject specific mitigation plans.  
 
90. 
There are allegations of forced labor risks associated with the polysilicon suppliers. The Borrower will require 
bidders to provide two declarations: a Forced Labor Performance Declaration (which covers past performance), and a 
Forced Labor Declaration (which covers future commitments to prevent, monitor and report on any forced labor,
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 95 
     
 
 
cascading the requirements to their own sub-contractors and suppliers).  In addition, the Borrower will include enhanced 
language on forced labor in the procurement contracts. 
 
Gender 
91. 
The project preparatory activities, in alignment with the Gender Strategy of the World Bank, and as agreed 
with the counterparts, included specific gender activities. A preliminary gender assessment was conducted to assess 
the main gender gaps in the country and an action plan of activities was developed for the project.   
92. 
The project’s focus in fostering gender equality will be closely monitored during project implementation. The 
project results framework includes two intermediate indicators linked to gender: (a) the percentage of women 
employed in the energy sector and (b) Completion of the Diagnostic Gender Assessment. The project will collect sex-
disaggregated data where applicable. Additional details regarding the gender analysis, actions, monitoring and 
evaluation, and the project gender action plan are provided in annex 4. 
 
Citizen Engagement 
 
93. 
Stakeholder consultations have been undertaken as part of the project preparation and will continue during 
project implementation. Combined with a broader communication awareness, these consultations will provide an 
opportunity to interact with the wider public through focus group discussions to understand the experiences people 
and businesses have with electricity services and their expectations about their improvements. The stakeholder 
consultations include women-only sessions, scheduled to ensure that women understand the scope of the project and 
how it will impact their access and usage of the electrical services. The consultative sessions also include owners and 
managers of women-owned small and medium enterprises in order to understand their experiences and how availability 
of reliable electricity could contribute to increased productivity and income-generating opportunities. Synergies with 
relevant projects, such as the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346), have informed the 
project design aimed at maximizing impacts on gender equality.  
 
94. 
The project will establish a citizens’ feedback mechanism and grievance redress system, which will look at 
beneficiary satisfaction, and other citizen engagement tools. The project GRM will build on what was created for the 
Somali Electricity Access Project (See separate SEP). A specific consultation session on the E&S Risk Assessment and 
Action Plan and GRM will be set up to complete the SEP.  A Feedback and Grievance Redressal System that will have 
various contact channels is envisioned for SESRP. Noting the indirect benefit of component 1 to citizens/households due 
to reduction of inefficiencies in the network, the GRM will include mechanisms for citizens or households to be able to 
register their feedback or complaint towards the performance of the ESPs, their existing supply situation, billings, etc. 
The GRM has to be in place by the time the RAPs and ESIAs are prepared, until completion of all construction activities 
and beyond until the defect liability period ends. A separate mechanism is developed to address worker grievances. 
Grievances related to the actions of contractors are resolved by the contractors. Under the project, project beneficiaries’ 
satisfaction with activities will be tracked by beneficiaries that feel project investments reflected their needs (%), and 
satisfaction of enterprises in beneficiaries survey as part of overall project monitoring.  
 
95. 
The GRM will be a project wide GRM that will also be available for use by PAPs. The GRM will work 
interconnectedly with local level actors at the FMS, community, District, and Municipal levels. This is to ensure that all 
measures are taken to address the grievance. The GRM will be housed at both MoEWR (FGS); and the MoEM 
(Somaliland) and provide access to SESRP stakeholders and contractors to register complaints received at sub-project
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 95 
     
 
 
level or the field. At the Municipality /Local Government level, a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) shall be established 
and composed of local leaders, municipal representatives, the project, community-based organizations, Legal Aid and 
law enforcement agencies. The GRC will be headed through a consensual appointment done with affected communities, 
and steps will be taken to ensure that all grievances are properly documented and transferred to the digital platform 
for tracking of resolution. The PAPs may also make complaints directly to the project wide GRM through the digital 
platform either by calling, sending text, whatsapp etc. The project will identify an NGO GBV service provider to set up 
and ethically manage SEA/SH complaints. The detailed structure of the GRM for the project workers has been described 
in the LMP and will be detailed in the project operations manual. 
 
96. 
The beneficiaries will be able to register their feedback or complaint toward the performance of the ESPs and in 
general electricity services delivery. The project will conduct independent surveys to track beneficiaries’ feedback on 
their perception and experience of the activities implemented under the project, which will be disaggregated by gender 
and geographical area. The consultation processes will be an ongoing activity throughout the project cycle to ensure 
that stakeholders are fully engaged, especially the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. In addition, to prevent and 
respond to GBV during project implementation, measures will be taken to sensitize and train the PIU, implementing 
agencies (IAs), and contractors against GBV. The final beneficiaries of the project, mainly the consumers of electricity 
services in the country are unlikely to be aware of the new technologies being presented and will benefit from 
information about the services, explanation about how the services can be accessed, and the opportunity to interact 
with service providers to share their feedback and concerns. It will be expected that the representative of consumer 
groups will sit in the ESWG to voice the concerns of consumers, as well as help service providers better understand the 
needs and concerns of their customers. The citizen engagement program will employ a variety of messaging tools and 
personal interaction to reach various audiences while ensuring opportunities for two-way dialogue. Specifically, the 
beneficiary ESPs, will be required to undertake annual Consumer Satisfaction Surveys, the results of which and the 
actions thereof shall be publicly disclosed. 
 
Climate and Disaster Risks 
 
97. 
The screening (providing B rating) considered the various locations of the project interventions as well as the 
types of infrastructure to be constructed, including those that may be vulnerable to various climatic hazards. The 
screening has confirmed that Somalia is highly prone to cyclical floods and droughts. Short- and long-term climate 
change and disaster risks that could potentially affect the sustainability of the project outputs and outcomes mainly 
include temperature increases, floods, and sandstorms. The temperature rise is not expected to have an impact on the 
performance of the facilities to be installed under the project, as the associated equipment is designed to operate under 
a wide temperature range. Sandstorms and dust accumulation might affect the network facilities (lines, solar PV panels, 
and the BESS equipment). However, the mechanical and electrical design is robust enough to withstand the impacts. 
The site selection process for the solar PV panels and electricity networks will try to avoid flood-prone areas wherever 
possible. It will include developing equipment and construction designs, specifically use of steel and concrete poles with 
concrete foundations, to withstand flashfloods. For the equipment that maybe prone to dust, such as the control and 
BESS equipment, the engineering specifications will require that the equipment is installed in dust-proof cabins. In 
addition, the O&M will include routine monitoring and, where required, cleaning of the solar panels to avoid dust 
cumulations. Therefore, the risks will be addressed through proper design, siting, operation, and maintenance of the 
infrastructure assets.
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 95 
     
 
 
Climate Co-Benefits.  
 
98. 
This project tackles climate change both from a mitigation and an adaptation perspective. By reinforcing the grid 
and building a more efficient and resilient network, the project will reduce technical losses in the grid and make it more 
climate resilient. In addition, by supporting the installation of BESS and solar PV systems, the project will optimize 
renewable energy generation and reduce GHG emissions. Finally, by increasing access to electricity services in 
communities highly vulnerable to climate change, the project will contribute to increased resilience. Climate co-benefits 
have been assessed at US$73.31million (48.88 percent)  and the project also has potential for increasing climate co-
benefits. Several project activities will generate climate change mitigation and adaptation co-benefits: 
 
a. Component 1 activities (generator synchronization and the sub-transmission and distribution network 
reconstruction and capacity reinforcement will result in a reduction in technical losses, estimated at 90 GWh 
energy savings annually in addition to reduced generator fuel consumption from wet-stacking estimated at 
about 40 million liters of diesel annually. Both the reduction in losses and reduced fuel consumption are 
estimated to lead to reduced GHG emissions equivalent to about 106 ktCO2 annually. 
b. Component 2 (Renewable Energy Generation Optimization) will support installation of renewable energy 
capacity (both solar PV and BESS) equivalent to about 18 MW, equivalent to about 25 ktonCO2 of avoided GHG 
emission annualy.  
c. Component 3 will support installation of solar PV systems with a total capacity of around 5.1 MWp, leading to 
about 16 ktCO2 of avoided GHG emissions per year.   
d. Component 4 will contribute to climate mitigation as the activities related to capacity building and institutional 
strengthening will support institutional policies that will enhance increased uptake of renewable energy 
(through the prioritization under the Sector Least-Cost Development Plan and the associated wind resource site-
specific measurements and geothermal resource mapping) and enable the sector’s energy policy, which 
prioritizes renewable energy–based generation, given the country’s comparative advantage. Further, the 
component will help establish a regulatory regime that will improve ESPs efficiency and lower their operational 
cost. 
 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES 
99. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank–supported project 
may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the bank’s Grievance Redress Service 
(GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. 
Project-affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the World Bank’s independent Inspection 
Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank noncompliance with its 
policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the 
World Bank’s attention and bank management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to 
submit complaints to the World Bank’s GRS, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-
and-services/grievance-redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection 
Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org. 
 
VI. 
KEY RISKS 
100. 
The overall risk of the project is considered “substantial”. There are several risks to this project, including a fluid 
political and security situation, poor sector governance, and lack of an enabling institutional and legal framework. While
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 95 
     
 
 
efforts have been made toward political settlement, reconciling the country, and bringing peace, security remains a 
challenge, especially in some regions in the south and central Somalia. Sector institutions continue to face capacity 
constraints and operate within a policy and regulatory vacuum. These challenges continue to create an extremely 
challenging operating environment. However, the risks of inaction outweigh these challenges, and thus the mitigation 
measures to be supported by the project. With these measures, such as provision of technical assistance to enhance the 
sector capacity and provide project implementation support, the overall risk rating for this project has been rated as 
substantial. 
 
101. 
Political and Governance (High). Relations among FGS, FMS, and Somaliland could impact the project 
implementation. Further, the current uncertainty regarding FGS elections could heighten existing tensions in Somalia 
and shift the development priorities. Overall, the adequacy of political commitment and capacity to create partnerships 
to strengthen institutions and set up an enabling regulatory environment may also undermine the success of the project. 
There is also a potential risk regarding contestation around the amounts and project locations. In addition, the lack of 
FGS-GoSL agreement for IDA funds flow is a risk and may delay project implementation. Mitigation measures include 
coordination and working closely with the various key stakeholders such as the FGS, FMS, GoSL, and the ESP agencies 
during project implementation. The project activities are prioritized as per the assessments of the Somalia Electricity 
Power Masterplan for the targeted major load centers and the ongoing geospatial analysis with regard to the targeted 
public institutions. Discussions are underway between the World Bank, FGS and GoSL to establish IDA funds flow. 
Despite the mitigation measures, the residual risk is rated high given the fact the political uncertainties are beyond the 
control of the project. 
 
102. 
Macroeconomic (Substantial). The residual risk is rated Substantial, given the fact that the sector operations 
have been mainly financed by the private sector (the ESPs). A key concern is the impact of the COVID-19 on the ESPs 
operations. Over the past year, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented global economic and social crisis, 
significantly affecting all aspects of life. The whole range of consequences for the energy sector is yet to be revealed and 
is difficult to predict. However, it is already clear that demand for energy resources has dropped, and nonpayment of 
utilities bills by consumers will have a detrimental effect along the supply chain. Another concern is the impact of the 
reduced demand on the ESPs’ cash flows and the spillover effect this has on the operation’s sustainability. 
 
103. 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation (Substantial). Low capacity within the implementing agencies 
(ministries of energy) and ESPs risks undermining the ability to effectively prepare and implement the project in a timely 
and effective manner. To mitigate this risk, the project will use the existing PIUs established under the ongoing World 
Bank–financed SEAP project (P165497). Further, lack of adequate capacity related to implementation will be mitigated 
by having an OE/supervision consultant that will support the PIUs in the detailed activity design, procurement, and 
contracts management. The project also includes capacity-building activities to establish effective management of the 
sector activities. In addition, the project proposes to strengthen budget allocation for the provision of electricity to 
health and education facilities after the lifetime of the project. While it provides TA activities to increase the capacity of 
the line ministries and of the revenue stream from the facilities to contribute to the operating expenses, it remains a 
residual risk that the SHSs will not be adequately maintained after the project. 
 
104. 
Fiduciary (Substantial). The financial management and procurement environment in Somalia remain challenging, 
with some potential levels of mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency, and corruption. Although anticorruption and 
public-sector regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. 
Mitigation measures were detailed following the findings of the Financial Management and Procurement Assessments
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 95 
     
 
 
and will be included in the Project Operations Manual and the PPSD. Further, the project builds on the lessons learned 
under the ongoing SEAP, such as retaining the SEAP PIU-dedicated procurement and FM specialists who have been 
trained under the SEAP. In addition, on-the-job fiduciary training and World Bank’s periodic reviews and implementation 
support will regularly be undertaken to help in mitigating these risks. 
 
105. 
Environmental and Social (High). The environmental rating is based on the complexity of activities proposed, 
coverage of the project, as well as its possible impacts. First, the electricity supply industry in Somalia is dominated by 
private players with poor safety records. Second, the government does not own generation assets and has small leverage 
and low capacity to oversee the Environmental risks of the project. Third, there is little or no formal regulation or codes 
of standards of practice and mechanism to vet and enforce electricity services quality, health and safety standards. The 
potential environmental risks include (a) management of environmental and social risks and impacts of the Associated 
Facilities, such as ESP generation facilities under component 1 and 2 activities (b) disposal and management of liquid 
and solid waste, such as spoils metals, cables, capacitor, wood, glass, and packaging materials under component 1 ,2 
and 3 activities; (c) disposal and management of hazardous wastes such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from older 
imported transformers and capacitors in use by ESPs, transformer parts and oils, certain amount of heavy metals, used 
and damaged solar panels, and batteries; under component 1, 2 and 3 (d) soil erosion and degradation; (e) fauna and 
flora disturbance leading to loss of habitats due to land clearance; under component 1 activities (f) dust and noise; (g) 
contamination and degradation of soil and water; (h) health and safety of employees and communities including those 
associated with operation of vehicles, plant and equipment, working at height, contaminations associated with improper 
handling of e-wastes, electrocution and aesthetic, and resource use (water and building materials for construction 
camps) in areas of less availability. The potential project risks associated with the disposal and management of 
hazardous wastes will be more aggravated due to limited capacity on disposal, recycling, and management of non-
biodegradable hazardous wastes from electrical equipment; damaged or leftover solar panels and used or damaged 
batteries; and limited knowledge and capacity in O&M of these new energy technologies, including availability and 
affordability of parts. These risks and impacts are expected to be managed in accordance with the World Bank 
environmental, health, and safety guidelines and the relevant requirements of Environmental and Social Standards ESS1, 
ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, and ESS6. Key social risks include: (a) ensuring security for project operations and associated workers, 
(b) potential land acquisition required for the installation of 132kV sub-transmission network and associated 
substations, medium voltage line (<33kV) corridors and possible expansion of existing and green field minigrids and 
Distribution network, (c) forced displacement of IDPs is said to be rampant especially in urban centers such as 
Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe and may be carried out in anticipation of project investment (d) past issues around 
land and unsettled/multiple claims with the existing generation sites occupied by the ESPs and the distribution network 
(e) systemic weakness in the capacity of implementing agencies to identify, understand and prevent adverse 
environmental and social impacts of the project, (f) fragility, conflict, and violence; (g) vulnerability and social exclusion; 
(h) spatial dynamics linked to urban growth and rural poverty; (i) social impacts of climate-related risks and 
environmental degradation (j) Potential establishment of workers camp may exacerbate risks associated with gender-
based violence (GBV) or sexual abuse and exploitation (SAE) sexual exploitation and abuse, and other forms of GBV. 
Currently GBV risk for the project has been assessed to be high, and a GBV action plan has been prepared. All E&S risk 
mitigation measures have been detailed in the appropriate ESF instruments prepared in line with ESS1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 10 
and the ESCP.  
106. 
At project feasibility and design stage, special attention would be required to overtly avoid and minimize land 
acquisition. Design alternatives will be explored such as underground/tunneling routing for the transmission and 
distribution network and selection of poles and towers with minimal footprints. The project E&S screening will involve
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 95 
     
 
 
current use of land for residential/livelihood purposes, land disputes and claims. Particularly for components 2 and 3 
activities, the screening will be used to ascertain encumbrance free availability of land as part of the selection criteria 
and avoid any form of physical or economic displacement. In exceptional situations a RAP may be prepared for 
settlement of past claims and compensation purposes and agreed upon for the facility to be selected for investment 
under the project. For component 1, the availability of land and an agreement on Resettlement Action Plan in line with 
ESS5 will be a key decision-making criteria for construction activities.  Compounded by gaps in legal and regulatory 
frameworks, land appropriation and asset valuation will be challenging. Given the government’s own budget situation, 
the project would require making an exceptional provision for payments of land and resettlement compensation, which 
will need to be reviewed as sub-projects are prepared. 
 
107. 
Regarding the risk of forced labor, under Environmental and Social Standard 2 (ESS2), where there is a significant 
risk of forced labor related to primary supply workers, the Borrower requires the primary supplier to identify those risks 
and if forced labor cases are identified, the Borrower will require the primary supplier to take appropriate steps to 
remedy them. Ultimately, where remedy is not possible, the Borrower will, within a reasonable period, shift the project’s 
primary suppliers to suppliers that can demonstrate that they are meeting the relevant requirements of ESS2. Prior to 
beginning the procurement process, the Borrower will undertake market analysis to identify the possible sellers of solar 
panels to the project. The bidding documents will emphasize forced labor risks in solar panels and components and will 
require that sellers of solar panels to the project will not engage or employ any forced labor among their work force.  
Bidders will be required to provide two declarations: a Forced Labor Performance Declaration (which covers past 
performance), and a Forced Labor Declaration (which covers future commitments to prevent, monitor and report on 
any forced labor, cascading the requirements to their own sub-contractors and suppliers).  In addition, enhanced 
language on forced labor will be included in the procurement contracts.  The Bank will prior review procurements of 
solar panels and components to ensure that enhanced provisions are used by the Borrower. 
Other risks (High) 
 
108. 
Security Situation Risk (High). Much of Somalia remains in conflict, which affects access to the project sites and 
insecurity for staff, of both government agencies and contractors. Given that the SESRP will be implemented across a 
diverse and contested geographical space, concrete threat vectors will require in-depth security risks assessments (SRA) 
to ensure the safety of Project workers, contractors and local communities. A security risk management framework to 
ensure adequate security risk management, emergency responses and duty of care for project workers, project-affected 
parties and contractors has been prepared. The framework will guide preparation of Project-wide Security Management 
Plan (SMP). In addition to flexibility with regard to the selection of the project sites subject to the security situation, the 
project implementation will consider contingency plans and require the contractors to put in place standard operating 
procedures to undertake the project activities in case of restricted sites’ access. Specifically, the project component 
design offers flexibility to undertake the activities in areas that are of low security risk and, when required, to select new 
sites.   
 
109. 
COVID-19 Pandemic (Substantial).  While all the possible impacts are yet foreseeable and quantifiable, the 
increased vaccination availability outlook will enable the resumption of travel and thus reduce risk with regard to the 
commencement of construction works and delays in imports of construction materials. The project will also address the 
growing need to fight COVID-19 as well as other diseases by making reliable electricity supply available to health 
institutions and by using BESS to reduce the cost of operations (fuel supply). 
.
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 38 of 95 
 
     
 
VII. 
RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
      
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project 
 
Project Development Objectives(s) 
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity supply in project areas and to reestablish the electricity supply 
industry. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
 
Increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity, re-establish the electricity supply industry  
Increase in electricity supply 
(Megawatt hour(MWh))  
0.00 
0.00 
41,000.00 
237,000.00 
237,000.00 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated (CRI, 
Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
6.00 
23.00 
23.00 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than 
hydropower) constructed under 
the project (CRI, Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
14.00 
23.00 
Annual GHG avoided (Metric ton)  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
181,000.00 
604,000.00
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 39 of 95 
 
     
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
 
Decrease in tariffs under the 
project (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
30.00 
30.00 
Establishment of the Electricity 
Supply Industry institutions with 
clear roles and responsibilities 
(Yes/No)  
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
Subtransmission, distribution network reconstruction, reinforcement in Mogadishu, Hargeisa  
Distribution lines constructed or 
rehabilitated (Kilometers)  
0.00 
0.00 
99.00 
331.00 
331.00 
Sub-transmission lines constructed 
under the project (Kilometers)  
0.00 
0.00 
16.00 
52.00 
52.00 
Generators synchronized 
(Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
48.00 
48.00 
Technical loss reduction 
(Percentage)  
40.00 
40.00 
40.00 
32.00 
32.00 
Number of people benefitting from 
improved electricity service 
delivery under component 1 
(Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
945,000.00 
3,150,000.00 
3,150,000.00 
Hybridization and Battery Storage Systems for Minigrids
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 40 of 95 
 
     
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated (CRI, 
Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
5.00 
18.00 
18.00 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than 
hydropower) constructed under 
the project (CRI, Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
2.00 
6.00 
18.00 
Capacity of solar PV installed 
(Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
4.00 
7.00 
14.00 
Capacity of BESS installed 
(Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
1.00 
4.00 
4.00 
Number of people to benefit from 
improved electricity service 
delivery under component 2 
(Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
380,000.00 
2,564,000.00 
2,564,000.00 
Stand-alone solar off-grid access to public institutions (Health and Education)  
Health facilities connected under 
the project (Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
30.00 
205.00 
205.00 
Education facilities connected 
under the project (Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
380.00 
380.00 
Number of people benefitting from 
improved electricity service 
delivery through health and 
educational facilities (Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
360,000.00 
2,565,000.00 
2,565,000.00 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated (CRI, 
Megawatt)  
0.00 
0.00 
1.00 
5.00 
5.00 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than 
0.00 
0.00 
1.00 
3.00 
5.00
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 41 of 95 
 
     
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
hydropower) constructed under 
the project (CRI, Megawatt)  
Institutional Development and Capacity Building  
Establishment of the Somaliland 
Energy Regulatory Commission and 
the FGS National Electricity 
Authority (Yes/No)  
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Adoption of secondary legislation 
stemming from the Electricity Act 
(Yes/No)  
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Adoption of sector integrated 
Least-Cost Plan (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Completion of the detailed 
Diagnostic Gender Assessment 
(Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Increase in women's employment 
in the energy sector (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
20.00 
Beneficiaries that feel project 
investments reflected their needs 
(%) (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
50.00 
50.00 
Satisfaction of enterprises in 
beneficiaries survey (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
50.00 
50.00 
 
IO Table SPACE 
 
UL Table SPACE
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 42 of 95 
 
     
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Increase in electricity supply 
The indicator will track the 
additional electricity supply 
provided as a result a) 
technical loss reduction and 
synchronization under 
component 1; b) off-grid 
solar generation from 
component 3 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset register, SHS 
installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated 
 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset register, 
contractors reports, 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than hydropower) 
constructed under the project 
 
Quarterly 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset register, 
contractors reports, 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Annual GHG avoided 
The indicator will track the 
reduction in GHG emissions 
resulting from improved 
efficiency of ESPs operations 
and establishment of 
renewable generation 
replacing diesel based one. 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs customer 
database, SHS 
installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
Decrease in tariffs under the project 
The indicator will track the 
decrease in the participating 
ESPs tariffs due to project 
Quarterly 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
ESPs tariffs 
 
ESPs, MoEWR, MoEM
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 43 of 95 
 
     
 
intervention under 
Component 2. 
 
Establishment of the Electricity Supply 
Industry institutions with clear roles and 
responsibilities 
The indicator will track the 
reestablishment of the 
sector institutions with clear 
mandates. Key milestones 
will include (a) Adaption of a 
new ESI Institutional 
Organization structure; (ii) 
Establishment of the 
Somaliland Energy 
Regulatory Commission and 
the FGS National Electricity 
Authority; (iii) Enactment of 
FGS Electricity Law/Act, and 
(iv) Licenses issued for 
generation, transmission 
and distribution operations. 
Annual 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports, 
Sector 
regulations 
 
The achievement of the 
indicator will be 
tracked by: (i) Adoption 
of a new ESI 
Institutional 
Organizational 
structure; (ii) 
Establishment of the 
Somaliland Energy 
Regulatory Commission 
and the FGS National 
Electricity Authority 
and; Number of 
Licenses issued for 
generation, 
transmission and 
distribution operations 
(Baseline 0; Target 10). 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Distribution lines constructed or 
rehabilitated 
The indicator will track 
progress in the length of 
distribution network 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5. 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
ESPs asset register/OE 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 44 of 95 
 
     
 
rehabilitation and 
extension. 
 
Sub-transmission lines constructed under 
the project 
The indicator will track 
progress in the 
establishment of the sub-
transmission network in the 
country. 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset register/OE 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Generators synchronized 
The indicator will track the 
progress in the 
synchronization of existing 
generators improving their 
efficiency in utilization of 
available installed capacity. 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset register/OE 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Technical loss reduction 
This indicator will track the 
reduction in technical losses 
for ESPs in the program 
areas resulting from 
distribution network 
interconnection and 
rehabilitation. 
Year 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs database (from 
total generation and 
total electricity 
delivered) 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Number of people benefitting from 
improved electricity service delivery 
under component 1 
This indicator will track the 
number of people 
benefitting from improved 
electricity service delivery 
Year 3 and 
Year 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs customer 
database 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated 
 
Year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset 
register/contractor 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than hydropower) 
 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
Implementati
on progress 
ESPs asset 
register/contractor 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 45 of 95 
 
     
 
constructed under the project 
 
reports 
 
reports 
 
Capacity of solar PV installed 
The indicator will track the 
installed PV capacity in the 
program areas 
Quarterly 
year 3, 4, 5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset 
register/contractor 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Capacity of BESS installed 
The indicator will track the 
installed BESS capacity in 
the program areas 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset 
register/contractor 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Number of people to benefit from 
improved electricity service delivery 
under component 2 
This indicator will track the 
number of people 
benefitting from improved 
electricity service delivery 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
ESPs asset 
register/contractor 
reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM, ESPs 
 
Health facilities connected under the 
project 
The indicator will track the 
number of health facilities 
provided with SHS 
connectivity under the 
project 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
Education facilities connected under the 
project 
the indicator will track the 
number of health facilities 
provided with SHS 
connectivity under the 
project 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
Number of people benefitting from 
improved electricity service delivery 
through health and educational facilities 
This indicator will track the 
number of people 
benefitting from improved 
electricity service delivery 
through health and 
educational facilities 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
Reports from 
connected health 
facilities (number of 
patients served) and 
educational facilities 
(number of scholars) 
MoEWR, MOEM
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 46 of 95 
 
     
 
 
Generation capacity of energy 
constructed or rehabilitated 
 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
Renewable energy generation 
capacity (other than hydropower) 
constructed under the project 
 
Quarterly 
year 3,4,5 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
SHS installation reports 
 
MoEWR, MOEM 
 
Establishment of the Somaliland Energy 
Regulatory Commission and the FGS 
National Electricity Authority 
The indicator will track the 
establishment and 
operationalization of sector 
regulatory authorities 
Annual -
expected 
operational
ization of 
sector 
regulatory 
authorities 
by end of 
year 2 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
National gazzette and 
other relevant 
government documents 
 
MoEWR, MoEM 
 
Adoption of secondary legislation 
stemming from the Electricity Act 
The indicator will track the 
adoption of the secondary 
legislation for sector 
operations 
Annual 
 
Implementati
on progress 
report 
 
Gazette and other 
relevant national 
documents 
 
MoEWR, MoEM 
 
Adoption of sector integrated Least-Cost 
Plan 
The indicator will track the 
adoption of the 
fundamental sector 
planning instruments for 
sector recovery and 
development 
Annual 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
Report publication 
 
MoEWR, MoEM
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 47 of 95 
 
     
 
Completion of the detailed Diagnostic 
Gender Assessment 
The indicator will track the 
completion of the Gender 
Diagnostic assessment 
Annual 
 
Implementati
on progress 
report 
 
Publication of the 
assessment online 
 
MoEWR, MoEM 
 
Increase in women's employment in the 
energy sector 
The indicator will track 
progress in the female 
workforce participation in 
energy sector institutions in 
the country as supported by 
project activities. 
Quarterly 
 
Implementati
on progress 
reports 
 
through an ad-hoc 
establishment of  a 
Women in Energy 
Tracking System to 
track women engineers 
enrolled in the 
incubator financed 
under the project. The 
system will track 
applications, admission, 
enrollment, 
performance, 
graduation and 
eventually  placement 
and retention of each 
incubator participant in 
the energy sector.  A 
feedback mechanism 
will also be established 
to collect feedback on 
the effectiveness of and 
how to improve the 
incubator program 
from implementers and 
users of the incubator. 
The data will be 
MoEWR, MoEM
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 48 of 95 
 
     
 
collected throughout 
the program though 
user surveys, focus 
groups and other 
methods 
 
Beneficiaries that feel project investments 
reflected their needs (%) 
This is a Citizen Engagement 
indicator which will measure 
the satisfaction of project 
beneficiaries (ESPs 
customers under 
Component 1 and 2, 
beneficiaries of improved 
services of health and 
education facilities) with 
project activities. 
In year 3 
and 5 of 
project 
implement
ation. 
 
Survey 
reports. 
Baseline 
established 
under year 1, 
survey 
reports in 
year 3 and 5 
 
Phone-based surveys 
will be used to establish 
a baseline and conduct 
the surveys to gather 
feedback from 
beneficiaries 
 
MoEWR, MoEM, ESPs 
 
Satisfaction of enterprises in beneficiaries 
survey 
This is a Citizen Engagement 
indicator which will measure 
the satisfaction of 
enterprises beneficiaries of 
project activities under 
Component 1 and 2. 
In year 3 
and 5 of 
project 
implement
ation. 
 
Survey 
reports. Base
line 
established 
under year 1, 
survey 
reports in 
year 3 and 5 
 
Phone-based surveys 
will be used to establish 
a baseline and conduct 
the surveys to gather 
feedback from 
beneficiaries for e.g. 
improved sales and 
profits, businesses cost 
reduction, job 
expansion. 
 
MoEWR, MoEM, ESPs 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 49 of 95 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 .
=== PAGE 56 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 50 of 95 
 
     
 
 
SERIES OF PROJECTS 
 
1. 
The Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (SESRP) has been conceptualized as the first of a series 
of three projects: (a) electricity sector recovery, (b) electricity sector development, and (c) electrification scale-
up. The SOP Development Objective is to increase access to lower cost and cleaner electricity supply in the 
Program Areas. The SOP vision has four themes: (a) infrastructure development, (b) renewable energy 
generation, (c) electricity supply to public institutions, and (d) sector capacity enhancement. These themes aim 
to achieve the following outcomes: 
I. 
Increased access to lower cost electricity supply from diverse energy resources especially from 
renewable energy resources for climate change mitigation; and increased access to electricity 
services.  
II. 
Improved access to functional health and education services. 
III. 
Sector institutional, legal, and regulatory enabling environment for sustained sector operations, 
including enhancing both the public and private capacity to manage and operate the sector. 
2. 
The SOP themes are transformed into four pillars (or categories of interventions). These four pillars 
define the program framework and capture the activities necessary to achieve the key results and outcomes. 
Table 1.1 provides a summary of the four pillars. 
 
3. 
The project and SOP will support the country in achieving the objectives set out in the PSMP, which, 
among others, include (a) development of an integrated distribution infrastructure connecting existing isolated 
systems and development of a transmission backbone to interconnect the distribution grid, (b) development of 
national renewable resources for cheaper endogenous generation capacity, (c) use of solar off-grid solutions to 
accelerate access provision, (d) leveraging of opportunities for power trading with neighboring countries in the 
Horn of Africa and the broader Eastern Africa Power Pool, and (e) establishment of an enabling regulatory and 
institutional framework with adequate capacity to undertake its mandate. 
ANNEX 1: Description of Series of Projects (SOP)
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 51 of 95 
 
     
 
Table 1.1 SOP Pillars – Categories of Interventions 
 
 
4. 
SOP 1 - electricity sector recovery - will focus on (a) distribution network reconstruction and 
reinforcement in the major load centers of Mogadishu and Hargeisa, (b) renewable energy generation through 
the hybridization (through SPV and BESS) of selected HSDGs based generation so as to optimize and scale up 
existing ESP generation infrastructure, (c) electricity access to existing public facilities (health and education) in 
rural areas to enhance public social services delivery, and (d) strengthening the capacity of sector institutions 
(both public and private) so as to set up an enabling institutional and regulatory environment for the sector. The 
activities for this SOP are described in the “Project Description” section.  
  
5. 
This project is expected to support the development of the sector’s institutional and physical 
infrastructure in the country and harness the benefits of regional integration and trade in the Horn of Africa. This 
first project will focus on sector institutional building, the establishment of an ESI with clear mandates and 
responsibilities for sector institutions, and an enabling regulatory framework for sector operations. By supporting 
infrastructure investments and improved operational efficiencies of the ESPs, the project will also set the stage 
for increased private sector participation in the country, supported by IFC. It will also establish the physical 
network fundamentals for connecting Mogadishu and Hargeisa to neighboring countries (Ethiopia), which are 
key loads for the two priority interconnectors identified by the country under the Horn of Africa Initiative(i) 
Ethiopia- Berbera through Hargeisa and (ii) Ethiopia-Mogadishu. These two 220kV transmission interconnectors 
could be established (total financing envelope of US$450 million) under the second phase of the HOA RISES 
project SOP (Board approval expected in FY23). The Feasibility Studies for the two interconnectors and the ESIA 
will be financed through the PPA established under Component 3 of the first phase of the HOA RISES project In
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 52 of 95 
 
     
 
the absence of these investments in Mogadishu and Hargeisa, investments for the establishment of the 
interconnectors would not be technically possible, interconnectors will also leapfrog the establishment of some 
segments of the transmission backbone in Somalia, leveraging regional IDA funds and rallying developing partner 
cofinancing.  
 
6. 
SOP 2 - Electricity Sector Development - will scale up activities to additional selected load centers and 
establish the subregional transmission backbone infrastructure in the north and in the south of Somalia, thus 
creating bulk supply points. This would allow the various major load centers (the interconnected subtransmission 
and distribution networks) to have access to bulk power supply, including from large-scale grid-connected 
generation and possibly imports from neighboring countries. Detailed activities and the associated feasibility 
studies for Phase 2 will be conducted under phase 1 and under the Somalia–Horn of Africa Infrastructure 
Integration Project (P173119). SOP 2 will continue providing support to renewable energy generation through 
hybridization of existing minigrids and will pilot the development of greenfield minigrids; it will also scale up 
electricity access to social institutions. In addition, SOP 2 will further support sector capacity and institutional 
planning for a large-scale electrification program and further develop an enabling environment for private sector 
investments. Furthermore, the upgrade of other countries’ main load centers, including Berbera and the 
establishment of the subregional transmission backbone, will ensure that possible power imports and additional 
supply can be dispatched at the national level and that the benefits of additional, lower-cost, and clean energy 
supply do power the socioeconomic recovery of the country, including ports and so forth. Figure 1.1 below 
depicts the vision for the phased approach of national and regional activities. 
 
Figure 1.1 Somali Energy Sector Recovery Project SOP and Proposed HoA RISES Sequence and Complementary  
 
Note: SERSP = Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project; HOA RISES = Horn of Africa Regional Integration for 
Sustainable Energy Supply. 
7. 
SOP 3 - Electrification scale-up - will scale up the last-mile electrification agenda, based on the experience 
acquired and the enabling environment established by the previous phases. SOP 3 will focus on (a) grid 
connectivity in the main load centers upgraded, (b) scale-up of greenfield and brownfield hybrid minigrids, based
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 53 of 95 
 
     
 
on the experience acquired under SOP I and SOP 2, and (c) electricity access to rural communities and social 
facilities with off-grid solar. Sector enhancement activities under SOP 1 and SOP 2 will establish the sector 
planning and operational capacity for the implementation of a nation-wide electrification rollout program, 
rallying both private sector investors and development partners to the electrification agenda.  
 
8. 
The SOP will establish a win-win-win relationship among public institutions, private service providers, 
and customers. Provision of basic services like electricity could play a key role in shoring up the legitimacy of the 
government as it seeks to reestablish its authority over much of the country, and thus the need to ensure 
effective development planning for areas that have seen themselves as marginalized for years or recently leaving 
conflict. The project will reestablish the mandate of public institutions in the power sector and the provision of 
public financing to ensure equitable and more reliable and affordable access to electricity services for the Somali 
population. The expanded role of the ESPs will help buttress and encourage an increased involvement of the 
private sector in the long run in both distribution and generations subsectors. In addition, improving electricity 
access and affordability will help the country address poverty through increasing household incomes, because 
increasing access to affordable electricity can create opportunities for the creation of new businesses and 
associated job creation. Increased and improved electricity services provide an opportunity to the FGS to help 
the Somali populace see benefits to the reestablishment of state authority with improved service and economic 
dividends.
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 54 of 95 
 
     
 
ANNEX 2: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan  
 
Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
1. 
The project will be implemented by, (a) Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, Federal Government of 
Somalia (MoEWR) in Mogadishu in close coordination with the Federal Member States (FMSs), electricity service 
providers (ESPs), and the Ministries of Health and Education, and (b) Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MoEM)35, 
Somaliland in Hargeisa in close coordination with the Somaliland ministries of education and health education 
and ESPs. Project institutional and implementation arrangements take into account the following: (a) the IDA 
Grant Recipient (FGS) and the Recipient Institutions (ministries of energy, education, and health) and (b) the 
ESPs who currently own, manage, and operate most of the electricity infrastructure. The ultimate beneficiaries, 
that is, agencies responsible for the operations and maintenance (O&M) of the project assets, are the ESPs that 
will be responsible for the assets financed and constructed under components 1 and 2 and the ministries of 
education and health for the solar home systems (SHSs) installed with financing under component 3. Figure 2.1 
provides an overview of the project institutional and implementation arrangements. 
Figure 2.1 Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
 
Note: MoEd = Ministry of Education; MoES = Ministry of Education and Science; MoH = Ministry of Health; MoF = Ministry of Finance; OE = 
Owner’s Engineer; ESP = Electricity Service Provider; TA = technical assistance; PSC = Project Steering Committee; ESWG = Energy Sector 
Working Group; FMS = Federal Member States; BSSF = Business Support Services Firm; IDA = International Development Association.  
2. 
The project will rely on the existing institutional and implementation arrangements established under the 
ongoing Somalia Electricity Access Project (SEAP). The staff at the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) shall be 
 
35 This is contingent on the FGS-GoSL agreement
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 55 of 95 
 
     
 
responsible for all the project implementations activities including procurement, safeguards, financial 
management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and project management functions as well as coordination and 
reporting to the World Bank. The director generals (DGs) responsible for energy at the MoEWR/MoEM shall 
have the overall oversight of the respective PIU. 
 
3. 
Roles and Responsibility of the Director General. The Director General shall have the overall 
responsibility of ensuring that the project responds to the Project Development Objectives and is implemented 
in accordance with the agreed and applicable laws and procedures. Specifically, the DG shall: 
• 
Provide the overall guidance in the selection of the various interventions and/or component activities 
in coordination with the FMS, the Ministries of Education and Health and ESPs. 
• 
Provide overall implementation guidance and formally review progress and approve the annual work 
plans. 
• 
Ensure that the PIU is adequately staffed, inclusive of technical and fiduciary expertise, to ensure 
smooth implementation of the project. 
• 
Provide necessary oversight and approvals as maybe required. 
• 
Seek approvals from the Project Steering Committee as maybe required. 
 
4. 
Project Implementation Units (PIUs). The two PIUs will comprise experts with different skills who will be 
responsible for the implementation of the project, including but not limited to the following general functions: 
contracts management, procurement, financial management, stores management, safeguards, and reporting. 
Each PIU shall have, as core staff, the following: (a) project manager/program coordinator, (b) financial 
management specialist, (c) procurement specialist, (d) project engineer, (e) environmental safeguards specialist, 
(f) social safeguards specialist, (g) gender specialist, (h) monitoring and evaluation specialist; (i) Land 
Management Specialist; and (j) Security Advisor. The PIU shall include members from the ESPs and the ministries 
of education and health as may be required at the various stages of the project. The PIU staff shall have the 
responsibility to oversee the project implementation, perform the required technical functions, and serve as 
the focal points for communication with World Bank, contractors, and consultants. For the respective 
components, each PIU will be also responsible for preparing the request for bids (RFBs)/request for proposals 
(RFPs) for tendering, bid evaluation, contract award, contract management, and so forth, and technical 
assistance consulting firms (for example, owner’s engineer [OE]) and the business services support firm (BSSF), 
financed under the International Development Association (IDA) grant, providing contractors and consultants 
with support and guidance during project implementation, as well as supervising contractors’ and suppliers’ 
compliance with all their contractual obligations as well as with environment and social safeguards 
requirements. The PIUs' organogram is presented in figure 2.2.
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 56 of 95 
 
     
 
Figure 2.2 Project Implementation Unit Organogram 
 
5. 
Owner’s Engineer. An OE, acting as the employer’s project manager, shall provide project implementation 
support to the PIUs in the design, procurement, and contract management to ensure smooth and efficient 
implementation of the project, including project-related environmental and social safeguards and project 
monitoring and evaluation. In addition to ensuring that procurements of the project-related goods, works, and 
services are undertaken in accordance with the grant’s agreed procedures and regulations, the OE shall support 
the PIUs with regard to inspection and supervision of the construction works and site supervision during the 
installation of equipment and testing, to ensure that the goods, works, and services are implemented in 
accordance with the designs, specifications, and terms and conditions of the relevant contracts. 
 
6. 
Roles and Responsibilities of the OE. The OEs shall be procured by the two PIUs. Once appointed, each 
OE shall be the designated project manager to the PIUs. The main role of the OE will be to manage and 
coordinate the project implementation. A key objective of the OE’s role is to ensure that all elements of the 
project implementation, including the supply and construction contracts, consultancy services, ESMP and RAP 
(where applicable), are of high-quality standards and are well coordinated, thus minimizing the delays in 
completion, and commissioning due to programming constraints or incompatibilities between individual 
components. Reporting requirements and services to be provided shall be detailed in the OE’s terms of 
reference (ToR) and the Project Operations Manual. 
 
7. 
Business Support Services Firm (BSSF). A BSSF, with experience in utility operations, will be hired to 
support selected ESPs in strengthening their technical and institutional capacity in key functions of the electricity 
utility business, including but not limited to corporate planning, commercial and network management, and 
operations. The experts provided by the BSSF will work as advisors twinned with the ESP counterparts for a 
period of two to three years. The experts will, inter alia, (a) assist the ESP staff to maintain and over time improve 
the current level of service; (b) coach, mentor, and enhance the capacity of their ESP counterparts in the areas 
of their technical expertise; (c) assist ESPs to develop and document organizational guidelines and procedures 
(Operations Manuals); (d) assist ESPs to collect and keep records of performance data; and (e) together with
=== PAGE 63 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 57 of 95 
 
     
 
their ESP counterparts, participate in the preparation and implementation of corporate strategic plans and 
annual business plans. Reporting requirements and services to be provided shall be detailed in the BSSF ToR. 
 
8. 
During the implementation phase, the following key oversight structures are envisaged to ensure effective 
coordination among the implementing agencies, Federal Member States, ESPs and Consumers.  
 
a) The Project Steering Committee (PSC): At the top level is PSC, to be constituted at FGS and 
Somaliland Ministry of Energy levels respectively The PSC will provide overall oversight of the 
project implementation; policy guidance; as well as take decisions on critical high level 
implementation issues, such as approval of selection criteria and obligations of the beneficiary 
ESPs. The committee will keep its membership to a limited number to ensure focus on the project 
(this is indicative at this stage and could change over the life of the project if necessary). It will be 
co-chaired by the Ministry of Energy with high level representation of the Ministry of Finance, and 
membership drawn from Ministry of Planning, Prime Minister’s office, Ministry of Health, 
Ministries of Education and Representatives from the private sector. Specific Terms of Reference 
(ToRs) that clearly specifies roles and responsibilities of the committee, frequency of meetings 
and expected outcomes will be included in the Project Operations Manual.   
 
b) Energy Sector Working Group (ESWG). A SWG will be constituted at MoEWR and MoEM level. In 
addition to providing guidance to project implementation, the ESWG is aimed at fostering the 
reestablishment of the sector. It will provide a forum for sector dialogue, ownership, and 
accountability among government, the development partners, and other sector stakeholders to 
support coordination and harmonization of processes, procedures, implementation, and 
monitoring of government programs, development partner support, and private sector initiatives. 
The ESWG will be chaired by the director of energy with cochairs from the private sector and 
development partners active in the energy sector. The ESWG will be supported by a full-time 
secretariat. The ESWG, with detailed ToR, will be established prior to project effectiveness.  
 
9. 
Governance. The Project implementation shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 
“World Bank Anti-Corruption Guidelines”, dated July 1, 2016 and revised November 1, 2017. To ensure that 
measures are in place to deter fraud or corruption, the following mitigation measures will be embedded in the 
project implementation arrangements: 
• 
Specific aspects on corruption auditing would be included in the external audit ToR. 
• 
Adherence to the Agreed Project Procurement and Financial Management Arrangements. 
• 
The PIU will design a payment checklist in such a way that at all levels and steps necessary to 
ensure compliance are undertaken and signed by each person involved in the process to hold 
individuals accountable and that payments are made within the stipulated timelines from the date 
of submission of the requests for payment. 
• 
Ensure that the processes are not flouted, especially procurement procedures, and ensure that 
specifications are not restrictive and provide fair treatment of bidders, timely completion of the 
evaluation, and timely contract award and signature. 
• 
Strong financial management (FM) arrangements will be in place (including a qualified FM 
specialist and periodic Interim Financial Reports [IFRs], to include budget execution and
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 58 of 95 
 
     
 
monitoring). 
• 
Measures to improve social accountability and transparency are built into the project design 
 
10. 
Specific governance areas of concern and mitigating measures are as follows:  
 
a. Unwarranted technical specifications in Bidding Documents intended to discriminate against some 
potential contractors.  The OE will carry out due diligence on the specifications during the request for 
bids. The OE is to ensure that technical specifications are fair and warranted. The Project’s progress 
reports will include key issues presented in the reports of the OE, which will be shared with the World 
Bank and availed to the Project Auditors. 
 
b. Fraudulent Claims of Work and Goods. To limit the risk of overbilling through reduced or substandard 
delivery of goods and works, the project shall ensure that the OE has adequate field presence for on-
site supervision. The OE will be instructed to be in the field periodically and to include random 
inspections without prior notice given. Since the physical, geographical and security characteristics of 
the construction sites may be a major constraint in monitoring the quality and type of work performed 
by contractors, the Contractors will be requested to provide visual documentation (video or pictures) 
indicating the work performed at critical stages such as foundation and equipment installation, etc.  
The OE shall prepare regular reports and care will be taken to verify that the OE undertakes adequate 
inspection. 
 
c. Annual audits of the project’s financial accounts.  An auditor acceptable to the World Bank and cleared 
by the Financial Management Unit of the World Bank will conduct the project audits. The audits will 
follow International Standards on Auditing (ISA) and the audit report together with the management 
letter will be submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end of the fiscal year. The audit 
report will be disclosed in accordance with the World Bank’s disclosure policy. The PIUs will submit 
audited accounts for the project with sufficient disclosures of the project’s sources and uses of funds 
in the notes to the audited entity accounts. The project shall be audited annually at the end of each 
financial year. The ToR for the audit, prepared by each of the entities, have been agreed with the 
World Bank. 
 
d. World Bank’s procurement guidelines. The World Bank will review and approve all key stages of the 
procurement process and will be alert to red flags of collusion and bid steering and other behavior 
leading to mis-procurement. The World Bank will closely monitor the action plans of the implementing 
entities in response to FM issues raised in the auditor’s Management Letters. 
 
e. Regular supervision. The World Bank’s project supervision team will conduct frequent dialogue with 
government and the PIU counterpart teams. The World Bank will conduct at least two formal missions 
per year with a full complement of experts, including the bank’s FM and procurement staff. 
11. 
Specific Component Implementations Arrangements. 
Component 1. This component will be implemented by the MoEWR/MoEM in close coordination with 
the ESPs in Mogadishu and Hargeisa. Key component activities will include detailed design of the of
=== PAGE 65 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 59 of 95 
 
     
 
the various activities and procurement of goods and works. The PIU and the ESP will be supported by 
the OE in the review of the designs, preparation of the detailed specifications, and preparation of the 
request for bids, contractor selection, and management of the respective contracts. The main 
contracts include (a) design, supply, and installation of substations and commission (EPC) of the 132KV 
subtransmission network lines; (b) substation EPC (132KV/33/11KV); (c) supply and Install of 33/11/LV 
distribution lines; (d) supply of distribution equipment (such as poles, conductors, line accessories, 
distribution transformers, metering equipment, EPCs for generator synchronization); and (e) line 
survey services. To build in-country capacity, the EPC contractors shall be encouraged to have local 
subcontractors, in addition to including the MoEWR/MoEM and the ESP personnel as counterpart 
staff during the various stages of the contracts’ implementation. After the construction is completed, 
the arrangements would be the following for ownership and operations. 
 
a. ESP Owned Distribution Network.   For the assets owned by the ESPs, the MoEWR and MoEM will 
amend the ESP licenses to highlight that the ESPs will continue to own their existing network 
infrastructure to be rehabilitated and upgraded with government funds, but they will not receive 
any remuneration until the end of the respective lifetimes. In addition and subject to detailed 
technical assessments to establish the baseline and targets, the ESPs will be required to report on 
certain key performance targets, to reflect the benefits of the investments, which will include, (1) 
technical loss reductions; (2) increased energy billed and commercial loss reductions; and (3) 
energy supplied to public institutions, (4) ESHS performance including reporting on respective 
activities on environmental, OHS and social performance and status of implementation of the 
environmental and social mitigation measures within the reporting period. 
 
b. Government owned distribution network assets operated by ESPs. The existing contractual 
arrangements (the license or service agreement) shall be amended to reflect the government 
investments. In addition and similar to the above paragraph, the contractual arrangements will 
include key performance targets to reflect the benefits of the investments which will include, (1) 
technical loss reduction; (2) increased energy billed and commercial loss reductions; and (3) 
energy supplied to public institutions, (4) ESHS performance including reporting on respective 
activities on environmental, OHS and social performance and status of implementation of the 
environmental and social mitigation measures within the reporting period. The proposed 
operational arrangements under (a) and (b) mirror similar industry practice of using public 
resources to undertake infrastructure investments that are later managed and operated by the 
private sector. 
 
c. Sub-transmission network. The proposed 132KV subtransmission network will be new 
infrastructure. The 132kV sub-transmission network will create bulk supply points to interconnect 
with existing the distribution grids. The network will be owned and operated by the government. 
Depending on the results of the institutional options analysis, the government could outsource 
the initial O&M services or create a new transmission utility company that would operate the new 
transmission assets. 
 
Component 2.  This component will support activities aimed at the hybridization and optimization of
=== PAGE 66 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 60 of 95 
 
     
 
existing minigrids. The component activities will include installation of Battery Energy Storage Systems 
(BESS) and solar photovoltaic (PV) systems at existing HSDG stations in selected load centers. This 
component aims at increasing the efficiency of the existing hybrid mini grids (diesel and solar) by 
optimizing the existing generation capacity and where possible reduce the diesel consumption by 
augmenting the installed capacity with BESS and additional solar PV generation. The project support 
will create new assets out of the investments in solar PV systems and Battery Storage Systems to be 
interconnected to the existing ESPs’ privately owned HSDG systems. The new assets will be 
constructed on sites either owned or leased to the ESPs. The government and ESPs will enter into a 
contractual arrangement that establishes either a Public Private Partnership, Concession Agreement, 
or a Service Agreement. The contractual arrangements among others shall highlight that (a) the 
Government retains ownership of the assets, (b) the ESPs will have the oversight responsibility 
regarding the O&M and ensuring that the facilities meet the performance standards over their 
economic lifetime, and (c) ESPs reduce their tariffs. 
The proposed implementation arrangements for Components 1 and 2 are based on similar 
arrangements adopted in power sector projects for countries with comparable institutional and 
regulatory structures. A similar case is the “Côte d'Ivoire - Electricity Transmission and Access Project 
(P157055)”. This project constitutes a US$325 million investment including reinforcement of 
transmission systems (225 and 90 kV substations, rehabilitation, reinforcement, and extension of 
distribution systems (33 kV and MV substations and lines) in 11 major cities and rural electrification 
of 209 localities in Cote d’Ivoire. The institutional structure of the power sector in Cote d’Ivoire has 
similar characteristics to Somalia. The Société des Energies de Côte d’Ivoire (CI-ENERGIES) is a state-
owned asset holding company responsible for managing public assets in the electricity sector as well 
as planning and contracting of investments. The Compagnie Ivoirienne d’Electricité (CIE) is a private 
company that operates and maintains on behalf of CI-ENERGIES the publicly owned assets 
(hydropower plants and national transmission and distribution networks) under an “affermage”/lease 
contract that has been effective for more than 25 years. CI-ENERGIES is the implementing agency for 
the “Côte d'Ivoire - Electricity Transmission and Access Project”. The CIE is closely involved in project 
implementation in its role as operator of the public infrastructure built under the project.  The CIE is 
supporting CI-ENERGIES by providing inputs for planning and preparation of technical specifications, 
participating in supervision of the implementation, carrying out acceptance tests, and commissioning 
of the infrastructure. An agreement has been established between CI-ENERGIES, and the CIE to define 
their respective roles and responsibilities during project implementation, which complements the 
provisions of the “affermage”/lease contract. CIE appointed a focal point for the project and engineers 
dedicated to providing inputs to CI-ENERGIES on project implementation, working directly with the 
PIU and the owner’s engineers. 
There are clear similarities between Cote d’Ivoire and Somalia in terms of procurement and 
construction of publicly funded infrastructure that will be commissioned, operated and maintained 
by private companies (CIE in Cote d’Ivoire, ESPs in Somalia), even though the institutional framework 
in the power sector of Cote d’Ivoire is much more mature than in Somalia. The contract between CI-
ENERGIES and CIE clearly defines roles, responsibilities, rights and obligations of involved parties in 
power sector assets management and operation. Therefore, it will be crucial to amend the existing 
license contracts of ESPs participating in the project, while at the same time a multi-stage roadmap is
=== PAGE 67 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 61 of 95 
 
     
 
prepared and implemented with the purpose of designing, putting in place and strictly enforcing a 
robust regulatory framework. This phased approach, starting in all cases from the signature and 
effectiveness of ringfenced concession/license contracts, was adopted by countries in Latin America 
and other regions that incorporated private sector participation during power sector reform. 
Concession contracts contained specific provisions for an initial period (4-5 years) during which the 
sector regulatory framework was fully developed and implemented, through the creation and 
strengthening of national regulatory agencies. Besides, public financing of assets to expand 
electrification (network densification and extension) that are subsequently operated and maintained 
by private concessionaires/licensees is by far the predominant method of network extension and 
densification in those countries. 
Component 3. This component will be implemented by MoEWR/MoEM in close coordination with the 
Ministries of Education and Health. The systems will be bulk procured to maximize cost savings. The 
Bill of Quantities will be aggregated at the regional level by the size of the system. The scope of the 
contract, with several lots, shall include Design Supply and Install and an Operations and Maintenance 
Contract for five years. The contract shall also include hands-on training on operations, maintenance, 
servicing and basic repair/ troubleshooting to the selected staff from both the MoEWR/MoEM, 
Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Health. Specifically, each beneficiary institution/facility, shall 
designate unit/personnel that will be responsible for monitoring performance of the systems during 
the O&M period and undertaking operations and basic maintenance services post the O&M contract 
period. In addition, to support the development of in-house capacity to integrate energy planning for 
the respective institutions, the Ministries of Education and Health, as part of the project will designate 
an Energy Officer who will be part of the Project Coordination arrangements with the PIUs. To ensure 
ownership and sustainability of operations, the systems will be transferred to the respective ministries 
after the issuance of the Operational Acceptance Certificate; they will ensure the adequate 
functioning of the systems during the O&M contract period and thereafter will provide adequate 
budgets for required O&M services including provision of battery and spare parts replacements.36 
Alternatively, the respective Ministries of Health and Education may also decide to enter into a service 
contract for service provision subject to the country’s national procurement guidelines. Specifically, 
the project will include training of the staff of the Ministries of Health and Education in aspects not 
only related to the installation and operations of the systems, but also to integrated energy planning. 
This is aimed at ensuring that in-house capacity is built into the respective ministries to include energy 
services when the various infrastructure facilities are being planned. Further, to increase the 
availability of qualified technicians, the project will also include training of staff of the local companies 
that could be called upon to offer after-sales services. 
 
Component 4 will provide technical assistance and capacity building activities to sector institutions. It 
will be implemented by the MoEWR/MOEM and benefit all sector institutions, including ESPs as well 
as the Ministries of Health and Education and other relevant stakeholders. 
 
36 Preliminary cost estimates for the management of the SHS over the first five years stand at US$9.6 million (calculated as a fixed 
fraction (2 percent) of the unit installation cost as per the industry standard and including battery replacement).
=== PAGE 68 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 62 of 95 
 
     
 
Financial Management Implementation arrangements 
 
12. 
Financial Management - Financial management capacity challenges that are likely to affect the project 
exist. These include lack of key FM competencies and internal controls, reliance on consultants, and lack of 
regulatory framework for key public FM aspects, among others. Various mitigating measures are designed 
specific to the project and as part of other World Bank and/or donor engagements in the country. Given the 
consideration for use of country systems (UCS), the project will adopt the UCS in various aspects of the project’s 
FM, including accounting and reporting, banking, oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General, 
and staffing. This will be supported TA with clear requirement for knowledge transfer incorporated in the ToR. 
The External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS), already established under the Office of the Accountant General 
and staffed with mainstream civil servants in consultation with the Directorates of Finance in MoEWR and 
MoEM, will oversee and manage the project FM. The EAFS units have been fully operational at the FGS, 
Puntland, and Somaliland for the past six years. The accountant generals will second a project accountant from 
the EAFS to the PIU. The EAFS and the PIU staff will be trained on World Bank FM procedures. Throughout the 
implementation of the project, the government is expected to ensure the EAFS and PIU are staffed team of 
professionals with relevant and adequate qualification and experience acceptable to the World Bank. The EAFS 
will ensure the following:  
• 
All important business and financial processes are adhered to. 
• 
Adequate internal controls and procedures are in place. 
• 
Interim un-audited Financial Reports are prepared on a timely basis. 
• 
The financial statements are prepared on a timely basis and in accordance with International 
Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS cash-basis). 
• 
The external audit is completed on time and audit findings and recommendations/ issues raised 
in the management letter are implemented expeditiously. 
 
13. 
Budgeting. The PIU working closely with the EAFS Unit will prepare and submit the project’s annual work 
plans and budget and cash flow forecast for each project component for the necessary approvals by the task 
team leader (TTL) at the World Bank. The work plans, cash flow projections, and budget will include the figures 
for the year, analysed by months and quarters. The cash budget for each month and quarter will reflect the 
detailed specifications for project activities, schedules (including procurement Plan), and expenditure on project 
activities scheduled respectively for the quarter. All annual cash budgets will be sent to the TTL at least two 
months before the beginning of the government fiscal year for review and approval. The project’s estimated 
annual disbursements for each component will be integrated and aligned to the MoEWR and MoEM budget 
calendar (on-budget) and will form part of the appropriated budget by the parliament. Budget utilization reports 
shall be prepared from the government FM systems (Somalia Financial Management Information [SFMIS] and 
Somaliland Financial Management Information Systems [SLFMIS]) as part of the internal government periodic 
reports as well as quarterly reports and submitted to the World Bank. The reports shall provide an overview on 
all the project resources disbursed to the government through the Designated Account (DA) as advances to 
finance the eligible project activities as well as disbursements through direct payments. The project budget 
estimated will be analysed and posted into the FMIS in line with the approved Standard Chart of Accounts 
(SCoA).
=== PAGE 69 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 63 of 95 
 
     
 
14. 
Funds Flow and Banking arrangements. The projected annual disbursements shall be integrated into the 
respective budgets of the FGS and Somaliland. Each implementing agency will prepare the budget, work plan, 
and cash flow forecast and submit for the necessary approvals from the governments and the World Bank. The 
US-dollar-denominated DAs will be opened in a financial institution acceptable to the World Bank. Payments 
from the DA will be eligible only for expenditures justified and properly documented. The EAFS will prepare and 
submit withdrawal applications for the DA. Funds will be transferred into the DAs against an approved 
withdrawal application as provided in the funds flow diagram in annex 2. The first IDA fund release will be an 
advance payment based on an agreed ceiling and on the submission of a withdrawal application. Replenishment 
and reimbursement of withdrawal applications will be accompanied by statements of expenditures, and direct 
payment will be accompanied by copies of records in accordance with the procedures established in the 
disbursement letter and the World Bank’s Disbursement Guidelines.  
15. 
DA Signatories. At the FGS level, the DA-A will be domiciled at Central Bank of Somalia (CBS). The 
signatories will be (a) Panel A: Director General of MoF (with Director of Administration as alternate); and (b) 
Panel B: Accountant General (with Deputy Accountant General as alternate). In Somaliland, the DA-B will be 
hosted at East Africa Bank in Djibouti. The signatories will be (1) Panel A: Director General of MoF (with Director 
of Finance as alternate); (2) Panel B: Accountant General (with Deputy Accountant General as alternate). 
 Figure 2.3 Funds Flow Arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
Accounting systems. The accounting system will ensure that financial reports are designed to provide 
relevant and timely information to the project management units and various stakeholders monitoring the 
project’s performance. It is expected that all levels of implementation will maintain adequate filing and archival 
systems of all accounting and relevant supporting documents for review and for audit purposes. The project’s 
original financial records, including all the supporting documentations, shall be maintained at the EAFS units. 
Reports & information 
Payments 
Reports  
Payment Requests 
Funds disbursement 
World Bank 
Designated Bank Accounts  
DA-A at CBS 
DA-B East Africa Bank 
Djibouti 
EAFS Unit within FGS & 
Somaliland 
(Office of the Accountant 
General)  
Project Coordination Units (PIUs)  
& 
Components Implementing Teams 
(CIT) 
 
  Banking 
data 
Vendor payments 
(Consultants, contractors etc.   
Withdrawal applications  
Direct payments
=== PAGE 70 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 64 of 95 
 
     
 
The project’s financial transactions will be captured, recorded, analysed, summarized, and reported in line with 
the provisions of IPSAS cash-basis accounting. These will be supported by appropriate records and 
documentation to track commitments and to safeguard assets. To facilitate preparation of the relevant reports 
and annual financial statements, the project budgets and expenditures will be recorded, classified, and reported 
through the FMISs according to the approved SCoA. The project will be required to provide periodic and annual 
reports covering total project expenditures; total expenditure on each of the project’s components and 
activities; and an analysis of that total expenditure into various categories of goods, works, training, consultants, 
and other procurement and disbursement categories. Eligibility of expenditures will be based on the actual 
amount incurred and supported by appropriate documentation. Accounting records will be maintained in US 
dollars. The EAFS in consultation with the FMS will ensure that invoices and payment requests are consistent 
with signed contracts before processing and release of payments. It will also monitor and report on the 
utilization of project funds, including the fiduciary standards and the reliability of the FM systems. A project 
fixed assets register will be prepared, and regularly updated, and physical verification of assets routinely carried 
out. The fixed assets register will reflect details of suppliers, description and location of goods, original costs, 
disposal of assets, assets reference (identification) numbers, serial or registration numbers, dates of purchase, 
assets additions, condition of assets, and assets’ useful life and residual value. Contracts registers will also be 
maintained with respect to all contracts with consultants, contractors, and suppliers. 
17. 
Reporting. SFMIS and SLFMIS will be configured appropriately to facilitate generation of the project IFRs 
directly from the systems. The EAFS units in consultation with the PIUs will prepare and submit approved Interim 
Unaudited Financial Statement IFRs not later than 45 days after the end of the quarter. The IFRs shall report on 
all funds received under the project, including any counterpart or other donors’ funds received under the 
project. The reports shall include a statement showing the period and cumulative inflows by sources and 
outflows by main expenditure classifications, beginning and ending cash balances, and supporting schedules 
comparing actual and planned expenditures. All IFRs submitted shall be duly reviewed and approved, with 
originals maintained at the EAFS and copies at the PIUs. Expenditures shall be classified by component, 
subcomponent, and by categories. The agreed IFR formats will be designed and integrated into FMISs. The EAFS 
will prepare Project Financial Statements covering all the activities of the project. Signed consolidated Annual 
Financial Statements for the project shall be submitted to the auditor general at FGS and Somaliland for audit 
not later than three months after the end of the financial year. The AFSs will be prepared in accordance with 
IPSAS cash-basis accounting as shall be agreed between the government and the World Bank. The AFS will 
include adequate notes and disclosures consistent with the cash basis of financial reporting under the IPSAS. 
18. 
Internal Controls: The project internal controls procedures and processes will be outlined in the Project 
Operations Manual and EAFS Manual. The project will ensure that all important business and financial processes 
are adhered to and adequate internal controls and procedures are in place. The possibility of circumventing the 
internal control system with colluding practices such as bribes, abuse of administrative positions, 
misprocurement, and so forth is a critical issue and may include (a) late submission of supporting documents; 
(b) poor filing and records; (c) lack of system integration; (d) lack of budget discipline; (e) unauthorized 
commitment to suppliers, bypassing budget and expenses vetting procedures; (f) unsecured safekeeping and 
transportation of funds; (g) uncertainty over the banking arrangements supporting the project; (h) potential 
exposure to money laundering; and (i) insecurity and political instability. These are mitigated as follows: (a) 
specific aspects on corruption auditing included in the external audit and monitoring arrangements ToR; (b) FM 
Procedures (as part of EAFS Manual) approved and in operation for the project; (c) strong FM arrangements
=== PAGE 71 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 65 of 95 
 
     
 
(including qualified project accountants in the EAFS units); (d) periodic IFRs, including budget execution and 
monitoring; (e) measures to improve social accountability and transparency built into the project design by 
ensuring that project reports are available to the public; and (f) annual PFM forums.  
19. 
Fixed assets control procedures over fixed assets and contracts management will be the responsibility 
of the EAFS in consultation with the PIU. The Internal Audit function, once established in FGS and Somaliland, 
will be mainstreamed into the project activities. The Project will liaise with the internal audit unit to ensure that 
project internal audit reviews are included in the annual work plans. The project internal audit reports shall be 
prepared and shared with the EAFS/PIU and made available to the World Bank team during project supervision. 
The internal audit capacity is to be strengthened and linked with other governments’ and development partners’ 
capacity building interventions. The internal auditors will carry out risk-based system audits to strengthen the 
project’s internal control systems. 
20. 
External Audit: The auditors general (FGS and GoSL) will carry out a project external audit with support 
of technical assistance. An external audit firm will be engaged and funded by the project to carry out the audit 
of the project activities. The audited project financial statements together with any additional information 
required will be submitted to the World Bank not later than six months after the end of the project. The audit 
would be in conformity with the World Bank’s audit requirements and in accordance with internationally 
recognized auditing standards. The auditor will express an opinion on the financial statements in compliance 
with ISA and prepare a Management Letter giving observations and comments and providing recommendations 
for improvements in accounting records, systems, controls, and compliance with financial standards. The 
external audit will pay special attention to the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to 
fraud, in line with ISA 240: "The auditor’s responsibilities relating to fraud in an audit of financial statements". 
The specific project’s FM arrangements will further be spelled out in the Project Operations Manual.  
Procurement 
 
21. 
Procurement Capacity Assessment. The PIUs have basic familiarity with the World Bank’s Procurement 
Regulations and have experience in implementing the Bank financed SEAP (which is in progress). However, the 
PIUs have limited familiarity and proficiency in articulating procurement and contracting processes of similar 
magnitude and scope as for the SESRP which has an increased spending envelope versus SEAP. The procurement 
assessment considered (a) the present contract management arrangements including storage of procurement 
materials (Inventory and Material Management), (b) the low score in contract enforcement, (c) the prevailing 
uncertainties due to COVID-19, (d) the FCS context, (e) the systemic weaknesses in the current procurement 
practices and delays in decision-making, and (f) the limited market potential. Proposed mitigation measures, 
among others, include:  
• 
Providing focused and need-based refresher procurement training 
• 
Upgrading the Project Operations Manual 
• 
Deploying the Owner’s Engineer to augment capacity,   
• 
Utilizing a Contract Management Plan (prepared as part of the PPSD) for periodic monitoring and 
progress review 
• 
Institute an efficient material management system without any stockouts  
• 
Timely advice & decision making by the management, and
=== PAGE 72 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 66 of 95 
 
     
 
• 
Disclosure of procurement information. The operation and maintenance provisions will be included 
as part of the scope of requirements in the bid and proposal documents and resulting contracts to 
ensure that the equipment installed under the project meets warranty and contractual obligations. 
 
22. 
Procurement risks. The project procurement risk is “High” based on the perceived risks. After 
implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, the residual procurement risk rating for the project is 
determined as ‘Substantial’. The Bank may periodically review the risk rating during the implementation of the 
project. In addition to procurement risks, there are additional risks related to security, access to sites, and 
transportation due to poor road networks. To address this security risk and potential bidder’s perception, a 
provisional sum is earmarked for contractors to arrange their security arrangements as part of the scope of 
requirements in the bid and proposal documents and resulting contracts. This measure may help the potential 
contractors to consider participation in the procurement opportunities and give assurance to contractors 
working on field-based contracts. This risk mitigation is in addition to the government’s support and security 
arrangements discussed in paragraph 29 below.   
 
23. 
Applicable Procurement Framework. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World 
Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers dated November 2020 (Procurement Regulations); the 
Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA 
Credits and Grants, revised July 1, 2016; and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. 
24. 
Procurement implementation arrangement.  For implementation of the ongoing SEAP, two functional 
PIUs were established at MoEWR and MoEM. The same PIUs will be utilized for implementation of SESRP. The 
implementation timelines of SEAP (stipulated to be closed on June 30, 2022) and SESRP are overlapping. The 
expertise gained and institutional memory will be beneficial for implementation of SESRP. The PIUs are staffed 
with a dedicated procurement specialist. In both the PIUs, an adequate number of officials (13 from FGS and 2 
from Somaliland including Procurement Specialists) dealing with procurement either directly or indirectly have 
undergone procurement training with focus on the World Bank's procurement regulations. Considering the 
increased spending envelope for SERSP and the procurement profile, the staff needs timely advice and support 
in articulating high-value and complex procurement transactions envisaged through SESRP. The World Bank 
continues to review the capacity requirements and staff turnover and provides need-based refresher trainings 
periodically, including training to manage the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) portal.  
25. 
Project Procurement Profile. The project will involve the supply and installation of subtransmission and 
distribution networks as well as synchronization and automation of the numerous generators and transmission 
and distribution, lines including building sub-stations, SPV-HSDG hybrid generation units with BESS, and 
standalone SPV systems augmented by BESS. The procurement profile also includes various technical assistance 
activities to enhance the ESI institutional capacity through developing policy, regulations, planning, O&M 
standards, safety, and technical performance. The procurement profile is a mix of high value and high risk as 
well as decentralised low value procurement activities. The project will involve the Supply and Installation (S&I) 
of the subtransmission and distribution network (greenfield as well as brownfield), synchronization and 
automation of numerous generators under component 1, the hybridization of High-Speed Diesel Generators 
(HSDG) with solar PV and Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) in component 2, and standalone solar PV 
systems for Education and Health facilities in component 3.  The procurement profile also includes the selection 
of an Owner’s Engineer (OE), a design and supervision consultant, advisory and strategic studies (developing
=== PAGE 73 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 67 of 95 
 
     
 
policy, regulations, planning, management and operations standards, safety and technical performance) to 
enhance the institutional capacity of implementing ministries and the ESI in Somalia. 
26. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The borrower has 
prepared the PPSD and Procurement Plan for the first 18 months with a focus on key procurement activities to 
select the optimum fit-for-purpose method and market approach and has prepared the PP for at least the first 
18 months. In terms of spending profile, the project envisages to procure US$60.5 million or about 40 percent 
of the project envelope (including a few individual consultancies) in the first 18 months. The PPSD includes a 
summary on procurement risk, mitigation measures, an action plan, and a procurement implementation 
support and supervision plan (the Contract Management Plan is as an annex to PPSD). The PPSD discusses the 
merits and demerits of feasible selection methods and market options for identified key procurement 
transactions and selects the best Fit for Purpose selection method and market option to derive Value for Money 
(VfM) for these key procurement transactions. For component 1, the Supply & Installation (Plant Design S&I) 
method will be the Fit for Purpose selection method for S&I of MV lines.  The Owner's engineer will be procured 
through hybrid QCBS (lump sum for tasks related to deliverables and time-based for supervision).  The PPSD 
proposes RFP (after Initial Selection) as selection method and the Open International option using rated criteria 
as market option for the design, engineering, supply, construction, erection, testing and commissioning 
(including the operation and maintenance period) for component 2. The life cycle costing will be considered 
after the conceptual design. The PPSD proposes to package component 3 into decentralized small value 
procurements to gain economies of scale and elicit the participation from competent potential providers in this 
market segment.  
27. 
Procurement Process. A manual procurement process will be followed (no e-government procurement). 
World Bank–prescribed Standard Procurement Documents with ESMF built-in features will be used for 
procurement transactions. PIUs have evaluation guidance templates for preparation of evaluation reports.   
28. 
Contract management.  The PIUs will be responsible for overall implementation and management of 
awarded 
contracts 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
agreed 
contractual 
obligations. 
The 
contract 
management/administration/monitoring/supervision is perceived as a function of the user sections/technical 
departments, and often the procurement team is not updated with the progress, neither physical nor financial, 
and changes and variations (amendments). The procurement specialist or engineers at the PIUs will be entrusted 
with the contract management function jointly with the concerned user and technical departments. Throughout 
the project an Owner’s Engineer and a third-party monitoring agency will be hired for all complex and high-
value contracts. Also, for these contracts, a Contract Management Plan (CMP) was prepared and annexed with 
the PPSD.  These measures augment the capacity of the PIUs in managing and implementing the awarded 
contracts as per the agreed contractual obligations. 
29. 
Security and safety measures. The respective governments will prepare and adopt security management 
plan of the project prior to issuance of bids for contractors and maintained throughout the project. A dedicated 
security advisor will be selected at each PIU to manage security and oversee the security arrangements. The FGS 
and GoSL will provide all necessary clearances and institute security measures to allow contractors to work with 
adequate protection.  Besides, a provisional sum will be earmarked for security and included as part of the 
procurement document. This amount may be utilized by the contractor for making its security arrangements. 
Mitigation measures for security include (a) allocate a necessary provisional sum for security costs, (b) ensure
=== PAGE 74 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 68 of 95 
 
     
 
permanent security presence at the work sites (joint responsibility of states and national authorities) and 
strengthen security measures, and (c) allow permissible subcontracting to national contractors who may better 
manage local matters. 
30. 
Procurement monitoring. The PIUs will develop customized monitoring to review decentralized and 
scattered works by using a web-based platform and mobile phone networks.  The procurement monitoring is 
part of the responsibilities of the third-party monitoring agency (a dedicated consulting firm to be hired by each 
PIU). 
31. 
Systematic tracking of exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The project will use STEP, a planning and 
tracking system, which will provide data on procurement activities, establish benchmarks, monitor delays, and 
measure procurement performance. The initial PP for at least the first 18-months has been prepared by the PIU 
and cleared by the World Bank. The PP will also be cleared through STEP. The PP shall be updated at least 
annually. All procurement to be carried out under the project shall be included in the PP and cleared by the 
World Bank prior to procurements. 
32. 
Procurement Implementation Manual (PIM). A Procurement Implementation Manual was developed for 
SEAP. The PIM will be updated with detailed project implementation arrangements and responsibilities duly 
considering the increased spending envelope and institutional arrangements with the involvement of ESPs, and 
the ministries of Health and Education.  
33. 
Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support. Two PIUs (one in FGS and one in Somaliland) were already 
established through the ongoing World Bank financed SEAP. These PIUs are staffed with dedicated procurement 
specialists. They have a fair understanding of the World Bank's Procurement Regulations (New Procurement 
Framework) and already use the STEP portal.  Procurement training has been given to an adequate number of 
engineers and officials (13 from FGS and 2 from Somaliland including procurement specialists) dealing with 
procurement with a focus on World Bank procurement procedures and regulations. The World Bank intends to 
build additional capacity and provide the desired additional support for key high risk and high value 
procurements. The World Bank is already supporting PIUs for high risk, high value procurement activities at key 
stages of the procurement cycle. This support includes sharing of similar procurement activities (knowledge 
base) for preparation of bid and proposal documents, provide inputs and review of draft procurement 
documents (RFP/RFB/RFQ), evaluation reports, and draft contracts before uploading to STEP. The World Bank 
extends this additional support besides prior reviewing of all contracts (mandatory requirement for Somalia). 
The World Bank’s support is already akin to Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS). The World 
Bank is in the process of establishing universal HEIS arrangements for all projects financed in Somalia.  
34. 
Disclosure of procurement information. Contract award details will be published in the official website. 
The following will disclosed: (a) a Procurement Plan and updates, (b) an invitation for bids for goods and works 
for all contracts, (c) request for expression of interest for selection or hiring of consulting services, (d) contract 
awards of procurements through open requestions for proposals or bids with international and national target 
markets, (e) consolidated list of contracts and purchase orders placed under limited request-for-quote 
procedures or direct contracting on a quarterly basis, (f) a monthly financial and physical progress report of all 
contracts, and (g) a report of actions taken on complaints received on a quarterly basis.
=== PAGE 75 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 69 of 95 
 
     
 
35. 
Complaints Handling. For the procurement-related complaints, the project will follow the procedure 
prescribed in the Procurement Regulations. To deal with the complaints from bidders, contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and the general public, a complaint-handling mechanism will be established. A formal grievance 
redress mechanism or procurement complaint handling system was established under SEAP and will be used for 
SESRP. Procurement records and documents were maintained in accordance with the guidance for procurement 
record keeping. The complaint handling mechanism and record keeping will be further strengthened under the 
project and will be included in the Project Operations Manual. 
36. 
Record keeping. All records pertaining to the award of tenders, including bid notification; registers 
pertaining to the sale and receipt of bids, bid-opening minutes, and bid-evaluation reports; all correspondence 
pertaining to bid evaluation, including communication sent to or with the World Bank in the process; bid 
securities; and approval of invitation to and evaluation of bids will be retained by respective agencies and 
uploaded in STEP. 
37. 
Fiduciary oversight and Procurement Review by the World Bank. The World Bank shall prior review all 
contracts set in the Procurement Plan regardless of the nature and value following the prior review thresholds 
guidance which currently requires that all contracts are prior reviewed. 
Strategy and Approach for Project Implementation Support Plan – role of the World Bank 
38. 
The strategy for implementation support (IS) is based on the nature of the project and its risk profile. It 
aims to make implementation support to the client flexible and effective and will focus on implementation of 
the risk mitigation measures identified. 
39. 
Risks related to the sector reestablishment and capacity enhancement. The project will support 
addressing these key risks through the technical assistance provided under component 4, policy dialogue, 
especially through the proposed Somalia Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation Series (P174889). The 
World Bank’s project team will maintain a close dialogue with the FGS, GoSL, and ESPs to ensure that proper 
focus on sector institutional reestablishment and project implementation is maintained. 
40. 
In coordination with the MoEWR, MoEM, and the ESPs, the World Bank’s project team will closely monitor 
project activities and the technical assistance activities to, (a) coach and mentor the staff in the aspects of policy, 
planning, regulation, utility operations, and management; (b) set up systems to follow up on the progress; and 
(c) prepare and implement various undertakings (such as the Sector Least-Cost Development and Investment 
Plan, secondary regulations required for both economic and technical regulations, and ESP business processes 
and operational Manuals).   
41. 
As part of the implementation process, the project will share with policy and decision-makers success 
stories telling how having and using the various guidelines, systems, and process has led to gains in and 
promoted a culture of accountability (for example having a Sector Prioritised Investment Plan helps to take 
priority projects to the market through an open, transparent, and competitive process and reduces). The World 
Bank team will continuously encourage the top management of the key agencies to actively involve staff at all 
levels in the project implementation so as to promote a culture of awareness of interdependencies and 
accountabilities between functions, to help to breakdown organization silos, and to create an aligned ESI.
=== PAGE 76 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 70 of 95 
 
     
 
42. 
Project Management. The World Bank task team will monitor the capacities of the PIUs throughout 
project implementation to ensure that they are adequate to implementing the project. In addition, the OE, 
designated as the project manager, shall support to strengthen the PIUs project management capacity. The 
World Bank will provide additional training where needed in relation to the World Bank fiduciary and reporting 
requirements, as well as in the areas of gender, environmental, and social safeguards management. In addition, 
the BSSF will support the ESPs to enhance their business processes, both managerial and operational. In 
addition, a key intervention, will be to support the Ministries of Education and Health to establish in-house 
capacity to integrate energy planning. 
43. 
Procurement. Implementation support will include, (a) reviewing of the Procurement Plan and providing 
suggestions, (b) reviewing procurement documents and providing timely feedback, and (c) monitoring 
procurement progress against the agreed Procurement Plan. More intensive support will be provided during 
the first 12 months to ensure the timely procurement and contracting of the big packages. 
44. 
Financial Management. Supervision of project FM will be performed on a risk-based approach. 
Supervision will review the project’s FM system, including but not limited to, accounting, reporting, and internal 
controls. The World Bank team will assist the PIUs in improving FM and reporting. The FM supervision will be 
conducted by FM specialists. 
45. 
Environmental and social impact management. The World Bank will provide support through the regular 
review of the semi-annual environmental and social monitoring and evaluation reports and will follow up any 
issues with the PIUs and their consultants. 
46. 
Implementation Progress. The World Bank will closely monitor the overall progress of project 
implementation by reviewing the semi-annual progress report, the execution of the Procurement Plan, actual 
disbursement, and so forth. The World Bank will provide support by regularly visiting the project, helping to 
identify arising issues that impede project progress, and discussing and agreeing on actions to resolve critical 
issues. Further, geo-tagging of equipment procured under the project will be used as a means improve 
accountability and transparency.
=== PAGE 77 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 71 of 95 
 
     
 
ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
1. 
Methodology37. The economic returns are assessed in a standard cost-benefit analysis. Component 4 is 
excluded since the economic benefits of technical assistance (TA) outcomes are difficult to monetize. The 
numeraire is the US dollar. The typical energy services provider (ESP) will price electricity in US dollar terms, 
even in the (unlikely) event that they keep books in Somali shillings. Benefits of components 1 and 2 are based 
on the economic value of displaced diesel fuel. The social benefits of electrification of health and educational 
facilities cannot easily be monetized in the absence of reliable health data, so as a proxy for willingness-to-pay 
we again use the avoided cost of diesel generation that would provide the equivalent electricity output. 
Economic returns are estimated for typical projects under each component, then aggregated to match funding 
allocations for each component for the calculation of an aggregate project economic return. 
 
Critical assumptions  
 
2. 
Three assumptions dominate the analysis: the cost of diesel fuel, the cost of (high-speed) diesels used 
by all the ESPs, and the cost of imported photovoltaics (PV) and battery energy systems (BESS). Somalia has 
some of the highest diesel prices in Africa, with average prices over the past five years from US$0.64 per liter to 
US$1.1 per liter (which attract no VAT or fuel levy). Prices (and exchange rates) vary widely across the regions 
(table 3.1). 
Table 3.1 Retail Diesel Prices in Somalia 
 
Source: FAO Market Update, January 2021 
 
3. 
The costs of diesel generation are strongly dependent upon the loading. At full load, efficiency is around 
30 percent; at partial loads below 50 percent the efficiency falls rapidly.  One of the main problems in Somalia’s 
 
37 This annex is extracted from a detailed Background Report on Economic and Financial Analysis.
=== PAGE 78 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 72 of 95 
 
     
 
ESP operation is that much of the generation is at low loading (in addition to lack of synchronization), 
compounded by poor quality of diesel fuel, and high distribution losses.   
 
4. 
Current PV project costs in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, Egypt and Kenya are around 
US$350 - 400/kWp.  With the Somalia CAPEX multiplier of about two and half (x 2.5), the PV CAPEX is assumed 
to be US$1,000/kW.  
 
5. 
Battery cell prices ex-factory China/Korea are US$140/kWh. Assessing balance of system costs at 
US$160/kWh then total cost for delivery in GCC/Egypt/Kenya would be US$300/kWh. Taking into account the 
Somalia premium (inland freight and insurance, security premium, technical experts for installation), the project 
PV CAPEX is assumed at US$750/kWh. 
 
The discount rate for the baseline estimate of economic returns follows relevant Bank guidance documents.38  
Its value is based on the expected real per capita GDP growth rate. With population growth rate still at around 
3 percent, over the past few years the per capita growth in real GDP has been very close to zero. Under these 
circumstances, over the next decade it is unlikely for the per capita GDP growth to exceed 2 percent, for which 
the Bank’s assumptions under the Ramsey formula sets the default discount rate at 4 percent.39  
 
General assumptions for economic analysis 
 
6. 
The following assumptions apply to the analysis of all the main project components (assumptions for the 
individual components follow below) 40: 
• 
Discount rate: 4 percent 
• 
Numeraire: constant 2021 US$ 
• 
Project life: 15 years. With an assumed start date of 2022, projects built in 2026 would record 
benefits up to 2041.  
• 
Salvage values: while PV life is taken at 15 years, it would not be unusual for PV panels to last well 
beyond 15 years. For the sake of conservative calculation, no end-year salvage credits are taken. 
• 
Diesel life: in the counter factual, replaced every 3 years, typical of diesels running under wet 
stacking conditions and poorly maintained.  It is assumed that all diesels are new in 2023, and 
then replaced every 3 years. For all ESPs optimized by the project, diesels are replaced every 4 
years. 
• 
Diesel O&M costs are ignored. We have no information on diesel O&M expenses typically 
incurred by ESPs.   One may be certain that under the synchronized and optimized conditions of 
the proposed interventions, the O&M costs will be lower: ignoring these ensures conservative 
result. 
• 
Diesel price to the ESP: US$0.7/liter (25percent higher in inland areas) 
 
38 World Bank, Discounting Costs and benefits in Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects, OPSPQ, 2016. 
39 This rate compares well with the discount rate in the Kenya Off-grid solar access project (PAD 2008) of 6 percent. 
40 The detailed background report includes some additional project assessments, including (1) the addition of an additional 
(smaller) diesel sized just for night time operation, and which allows a much better match between the typical load profile and 
high loadings in diesels, and (2) the PV hybridization of a rural hospital in Somaliland that runs diesels at very low loadings and 
faces a diesel price of US$1.15/liter.
=== PAGE 79 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 73 of 95 
 
     
 
Sub-component 1.1: Generator synchronization and automation 
 
7. 
The assessments in the PSMP suggests huge savings from synchronization and optimization.41 Lacking 
details on actual past load growth or reliable data on actual consumption, the economic analysis adopts a 
configuration that replaces a 2 MW HSDG by three equally sized and synchronized diesels.42   Additional CAPEX 
required for busbars, cables and connections, are based on recent similar costs for a synchronization project in 
Pakistan.43 The ERR is 47 percent; with 300,000 liters of diesel saved each year.   When GHG emission reduction 
benefits are included the ERR increases to 53.3percent at the low social value of carbon, and 59.2 percent at 
the high value. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sub transmission and Distribution network interconnection in the major load centers 
 
8. 
The ESPs in the target areas operate independently with significant infrastructure and operations 
duplication. The CAPEX investments will be in distribution system facilities to inter-connect with neighbours, 
building busbars to permit synchronization, reenforce the distribution network, and construct a sub-
transmission network in Mogadishu and Hargeisa.  The benefits are modelled as reduction in technical losses in 
the distribution system (from the present 40 percent to 32 percent, which may well be conservative), 
synchronisation (as proposed for smaller systems under component 1A), and optimisation of diesel operations 
to improve efficiency (modelled by extending the assumed diesel lifetime from 3 to 4 years). 
 
9. 
The ERR for a representative 2 MW ESP is 43 percent (NPV 34.8 million).  The highest uncertainty in the 
CAPEX estimate is the cost of distribution network extension, connection and rehabilitation, which absent a map 
(or single line diagram) of the network topology, is hard to gauge.  However, the switching value for this CAPEX 
is US$ 4.87 million – of highly unlikely magnitude for a 2 MW system. 
 
Component 2: Hybridization and Battery storage systems for minigrids 
 
10. 
In a hybridized system, the number of diesel generators and their size, and the PV field size, are selected 
in such a way to maximize the generator loading and hence efficiency (and minimize fuel burn). The benefit 
derives therefore not just from displacing diesel with PV, but also from higher efficiencies in the diesel generator 
units (Figure 3.1).   
 
41 Based on survey data of daily generation in ESPs of 885 MWh, in an automated and synchronized system this same installed 
capacity could supply 2,638 MWh, a multiplier of 2.98 (PMP, Table 103). 
42 The model builds upon the same assumptions as used in the PSMP. 
43 Amin, U. et al., 2014.  Implementation of Parallel Synchronization Method of Generators for Power and cost saving in University 
of Gujrat. Energy and Power Engineering, Vol 6, No 10. This makes the same assumption of constant demand in a system of 4.7 
MVA (similar to a large Somalia ESP) presently served by 7 individual diesels and reports costs savings of 30 percent.
=== PAGE 80 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 74 of 95 
 
     
 
Figure 3.1:  Loading Pattern, 500 kWp PV Field with 125kVA/250kVA BESS
 
 
Load profile as represented in the PSMP. 
 
11. 
The optimal size of the solar PV/BESS is a function of several factors such as44: (a) the diesel price (for 
example, at US$0.7/litre diesel price, for a 1 MW HSDG, a 500 kWp field would be optimal (Figure 3.2); (b) the 
number and size of HSDG units, (c) the size of the solar field, and (d) the actual load profile to take into account 
any seasonal variation and prospects for load growth. 
 
Figure 3.2: Optimal Size of the Solar PV Field, Beletweyne Hybridization Project 
 
 
12. 
Table 3.2 shows the economic returns for a typical PV hybridization project – a small 1 MW system in the 
town of Beletweyne, 340 km road distant from the nearest Port (Mogadishu), with a population of 225,000.  The 
region reports a diesel price in excess of US$1.00/liter (table 3.1).  Other assumptions include: 
• 
Additional CAPEX (US$20,000) for synchronization software and misc. costs associated with off-site PV 
fields (one implementation model would provide the PV energy by the DSI contractor) 
 
44 The requirements are set out in the World Bank’s Good Practice Note on Economic Analysis of BESS, May 2020. 
 
-
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
MW
solar
Diesel Unit 1
Diesel Unit 2
Diesel Unit 3
PV>battery charging
battery discharge
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
Solar field size MWp
ERR
0.7 $/liter
0.9 $/liter
=== PAGE 81 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 75 of 95 
 
     
 
• 
Diesel price of $0.875/liter (applying a multiplier of 1.25 to the coastal price) 
• 
Losses: 20percent, average tariff US$0.7/kWh 
• 
Life extension of the remaining diesels, now fully optimized, of 1 year 
• 
BESS 125kW/250kWh, with CAPEX 750$/kWh 
  
Table 3.2: Economic Returns of a Typical Hybridization Project 
 
Note: Screen snapshot only; calculations are for a 15-year life (also for the other sample tables below). 
13. 
The returns of 43 percent (NPV 2.59 million) are high.  For locations with lower diesel costs, the ERR is 
34percent.    
 
Component 3: Stand-alone Solar Off-grid Access to Public Institutions 
 
14. 
Most of these systems will be in rural areas and are assumed to have a diesel cost that is 25 percent higher 
than the baseline value of US$0.7/litre (diesel self-generation being the proxy for WTP).   The CAPEX for the 
typical 10kW system is US$59,500, with an estimate annual consumption of 35 MWh.  The diesel consumed in 
the counterfactual diesel electrification provides an annual benefit of US$13,000. 
 
15. 
The ERR for such a typical health centre PV electrification is 18.3 percent (NPV US$71,600). At diesel prices 
of US$1.0 (the Hospital in Sanaag, Somaliland, that is presently considering PV hybridization, reports a diesel 
price of US$1.15/litre), the ERR increases to 28 percent.   
 
Aggregate economic returns 
 
16. 
The aggregate economic returns and its component parts are shown in Table 3.3.  The lowest returns are 
for component 3, but the social benefits of improved health and educational outcomes will surely exceed the 
WTP proxy used in the analysis.  The present operation of the ESPs is inefficient, losses are high, and diesel fuel 
expensive that even with the application of a two and half multiplier over international/regional price 
comparators, the proposed interventions have high returns. Switching values are shown in Table 3.3.
=== PAGE 82 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 76 of 95 
 
     
 
Table 3.3: Economic Analysis 
 
 
These returns are robust to all the main (and many) uncertainties.  Returns are so high that reaching the 
switching values is highly improbable. The results are shown in table 3.4.  
 
Table 3.4: Sensitivity Analysis Switching Values (Impact on Project Aggregate Economic Returns) 
 
units 
Baseline 
Switching 
 value 
Assessment 
Diesel price 
$/liter 
0.7 
0.13 
Such a low diesel price has close to 
zero probability of being reached 
PV CAPEX 
$/kW 
1000 
>5000 
PV prices are likely to continue to 
decline, not increase.  $5000/kW 
might have applied 15 years ago 
Diesel life extension 
consequent to 
synchronization and 
optimization 
year 
1 
[undefined] 
Even when no life extension occurs 
(in any of the project components), 
the ERR reduces only to 27%  
Diesel CAPEX 
$/kW 
477 
[undefined] 
Even at 100$/kW ex-factory in the 
exporting country, the ERR is still 
29% 
Technical loss reduction 
[   ] 
8 
[undefined] 
Even looking just at the ERR for 
rehabilitation, at zero loss reduction 
the ERR is 21.5% (that derive from 
the 
synchronization 
and 
optimization parts of the project 
 
17. 
The quantitative risk assessment (Monte Carlo simulation) that looks at all of uncertainties simultaneously 
(rather than just one variable at a time holding the others constant at their base estimate) provides a more 
useful indication of risk.  For each uncertain input assumption, one stipulates plausible upper and lower bounds 
of uncertainty as shown in Table 3.5. Assuming uniform distribution within these bounds maximizes the relative 
weight given to the extreme values, and hence increases the variance of the ERR estimate.
=== PAGE 83 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 77 of 95 
 
     
 
Table 3.5: Plausible Bounds of Uncertainty 
 
 
units 
Lower 
Bound 
Baseline 
value 
Upper 
Bound 
Local diesel price (baseline value 0.7$/liter) 
$/liter 
0.5 
0.7 
1.2 
2030 Global oil price  
$/bbl 
55 
70 
80 
Somalia risk multiplier (applies to CAPEX of 
imported equipment) 
[     ] 
1.2 
2.5 
2.75 
PV CAPEX  
$/kW 
800 
1000 
1900(*) 
Diesel life, counterfactual 
[   ] 
3 
3 
5 
Diesel life for optimized system (increment over 
counterfactual) 
[   ] 
0 
1 
2 
Diesel generator cost (typical 500kVA for small 
ESP) 
$/kVA 
400 
477 
800(*) 
reduction in technical losses (% generation) 
[     ] 
5% 
8% 
12% 
PV system output uncertainties (as multiplier) 
[     ] 
0.8 
1 
1 
 
(*) upper bounds from PSMP 
 
18. 
The analysis shows that the probability of the ERR falling below a 10 percent hurdle rate is less than 5 
percent, and of falling below a 4 percent discount rate less than 1 percent. The probability of not meeting the 
hurdle rate is even lower when GHG emissions are included in the NPV calculations. 
 
Carbon accounting 
 
19. 
GHG accounting is integrated into the economic analysis, based on lifetimes of 15 years (corresponding 
to typical 15-year PV warranties).  Since diesel consumption (and hence GHG emissions) is a strong function of 
loading, the savings are based directly on reductions in diesel fuel rather than the usual default IFI/IPCC default 
values for emission factors. Lifetime GHG emission reductions are estimated at 2.37 million tons CO2. Valuation 
at the low and high valuations stipulated in the Bank’s Guidance document increases the economic returns as 
shown in table 3.6. 
 
Financial analysis 
 
20. 
Components 1 and 2 involve ESPs, about whose financial statements there is no information. The impact 
of the projects on the financial condition of the ESPs cannot be assessed. The financial analysis therefore 
captures just the well-defined incremental cash flows. Under the proposed implementation model for 
component 2 (PV hybridization), ESPs would purchase PV generated power from the design, supply, and install 
(DSI) contractors for the first five years, then taken over by the ESP. However, assessment of the transfer price 
between the DSI and the ESP is not possible at this stage, so the financials assume the entire project be 
implemented by the ESP.  Such a financial assessment is not appropriate for the health centre and school SHS 
(component 3), which generate no offsetting revenue from users.
=== PAGE 84 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 78 of 95 
 
     
 
Table 3.6: GHG Emission Benefits and Economic Returns Including GHG Damage Valuations 
 
 
 
21. 
Table 3.7 summarizes the financial analysis for the three main project types.  Financial returns are 
somewhat lower than the economic ERRs (as expected, attributable mainly to an 18 percent import duty on 
CAPEX), but highly profitable to the ESPs.  However, the extent to which the substantial cost savings of 
hybridization to the ESP is passed onto consumers will need to be negotiated on a project specific basis.  These 
are for the representative projects as noted. 
 
Table 3.7: Summary of Financial Analysis, Typical ESP Projects 
Component 
ESP size 
FIRR 
Real a 
Payback 
year 
(year) 
NPVb 
(US$ million) 
Tariff 
Reductionc 
(%) 
1A: Generator Synchronization and Automation 
2000 
40% 
3 
1.1 
4% 
1B: Sub transmission and Distribution network 
interconnection in the major load centers 
2000 
33% 
3 
1.8 
9% 
2. Hybridization  
1000 
39% 
3 
1.2 
6% 
 
Notes 
(1) Based on an assumed WACC of 12 percent 
(2) Pretax returns 
(3) Defined here as the year in which cumulative cash flows first appear positive. 
 
22. 
The transition from diesel to PV has little impact on the government’s tax receipts (as may occur in other
=== PAGE 85 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 79 of 95 
 
     
 
countries where diesel attracts significant tax).  With synchronization and automation, the interval between 
diesel replacement lengthens, so there will be some small decrease in the 18 percent import duty levied on 
diesel. On the other hand, this same import duty will presumably also be levied on PV imports.  The above 
estimates do not include the impact of income or business taxes levied on ESPs, which currently are ad hoc, 
without any uniform federal income tax levied on businesses. Efforts at federal tax reform are ongoing, and if 
implemented, they may well decrease the realizable net financial benefits to ESPs and consumers—though the 
returns are sufficiently high that any future taxes at conventional rates do not threaten the long-term 
sustainability of the projects.  
 
Tariff reductions 
 
23. 
The extent of the potential ESP tariff reduction will depend on the proportion of the total ESP revenue 
requirement that is made up of diesel fuel, and on the profitability of the ESP. For the hybridization and 
rehabilitation much will also depend on the financing arrangement of the PV and BESS.  The BESS will only be 
profitable if there is a tariff premium on peak period sales (or if current peak demand cannot be met due to a 
supply constraint).  The analysis makes the following assumptions: 
• 
35 percent of sales occurs in the 6 peak hours between 4 and 10 pm 
• 
Peak tariff of US$0.82/kWh, off-peak tariff US$0.63/kWh. The weighted average equals the 
reported average tariff of US$0.70/kWh 
• 
Profitability of the business: 20 percent (as percentage of its revenue requirement) 
• 
Diesel generators are replaced every 3 years in BaU, every 4 years once hybridized and optimized. 
Under the above assumptions, minimum tariff reductions are as shown in table 3.7. 
 
Resilience to climate change and assessment of mitigation/adaptation costs 
 
24. 
Somalia is subject to a range of natural hazards whose frequency and intensity is likely to increase because 
of climate change. All the proposed interventions are subject to these hazards, but in assessing their impact on 
economic returns one should note these are relative to the impact of the same scenario on the counterfactual.  
 
Acute hazards 
 
25. 
The main acute hazard is exposure of project investments to floods. This is strongly dependent on 
location: southern locations are potentially the most severely affected by flooding from severe storms even at 
some distance from the coast.  In the counterfactual, the worst-case flood damage would be the need for 
completely new diesel generators and replacement of control equipment. However, given that diesel generator 
CAPEX is small compared to running costs, even if diesels were added or replaced as part of the project 
modernization, the impacts can be expected to be small. 
 
26. 
Other consequences that may give rise to adaptation costs: 
 
• 
Increased sand and dust from sandstorms in the northern areas of Somalia may necessitate additional 
annual cleaning (the Good Practice Guide suggests costs of US$1.30/kW-year (so US$2.90/kW with the 
Somalia Multiplier).
=== PAGE 86 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 80 of 95 
 
     
 
• 
Diesel generators may need protection of physical structures or higher elevations against flood damage.  
This will be highly location specific (and may not be needed at all): we assume here a onetime cost of 
20 percent of CAPEX. 
• 
PV sensitivity to high winds, mitigated by stronger support platforms: more robust design leads to a 15 
percent higher balance of system cost for PV CAPEX.  
• 
Distribution rehabilitation and rationalization: increase CAPEX by 10 percent for more robust design 
against wind and flood (though again strongly dependent on location, but applied to all for sake of 
conservative calculation) 
Chronic impacts 
 
27. 
The main chronic impact is the gradual increase in temperature. The Somali National Adaptation Program 
of Action on Climate Change (NAPA), issued in 2013, suggested that mean average temperatures in Somalia 
would rise by 3.2⁰C in 2080.45  Temperature increases will have two main consequences for the SESRP: 
• 
PV output decreases with increasing temperature, so to maintain a given level of kWh implies larger 
panel area, modelled as an increase in CAPEX. However, there is considerable variation in the 
temperature coefficients depending on the type of PV cells.   A worst-case temperature gradient of 0.5 
percent power drop per ⁰C is assumed.46 
• 
Diesel power output also decreases with increases in ambient temperature, that can be similarly 
modelled as an increase in CAPEX.  Manufacturers’ specifications sometimes provide for running at up 
to 60 ⁰C, but in general the literature suggests thermal gradients of between 0.3 to 0.5 percent loss per 
⁰C.  For example, the Egyptian code specifies de-rating factor around a 40⁰C baseline of 1.053 for 50⁰C 
and 0.952 for 30⁰C.47  
 
28. 
The approach for incorporating resilience and adaptation costs into economic analysis of power sector 
investment projects is under preparation.  Costing some of the adaptation measures is the easy part (as noted 
above, annual cleaning in response to increased sand and dust deposits on PV panels is easily costed), but 
identifying the time path probabilities of increased dust and sandstorms is difficult.  Costing of other measures 
– such as protective dykes to protect a diesel generator against urban flooding is difficult in our case when we 
have so little information about the actual locations (and proximity to floodplains) of ESP generators.    
 
29. 
Even more difficult is stipulating the time path of climate change. Many assessments in the literature 
(particularly hydro projects, arguably the most studied of impacts of energy projects to climate change) note 
the uncertainty of global climate modelling in forecasting temperature and precipitation changes and are often 
reluctant to define how fast the changes would occur.  If one has a project life of 15 years it matters a great deal 
 
45 The World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal states mean annual temperature rise of 1.6⁰C by 2040-2059, 
and by 3⁰C across all areas of Somalia by the end of the century. 
46 The literature is reviewed by J. Kaldellis, M. Kapsali, and K. Kavadias Temperature and wind speed impact on the 
efficiency of PV installations. Experience obtained from outdoor measurements in Greece, Renewable Energy, 66 
(2014) 612-624.   They report a temperature gradient of 0.40-0.45 for c-Si modules, down to 0.2% for amorphous Si 
modules. 
47 A. Esebaay, M. Adma and M. Ramadan, Analyzing the effect of ambient temperature and loads power factor on electric 
generator power rating, International Journal of Electrical, Computer and Communication Engineering, Vol 11, No.27, 2017.
=== PAGE 87 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 81 of 95 
 
     
 
whether a severe climate change scenario will happen by 2050, by 2070, or by 2100.   Whether a proposed 
adaptation measure is economic obviously depends on when the risk against which it protects will occur. 
 
30. 
A further peculiarity of the diesel systems operated by ESPs is their short lives.  A diesel operated in wet 
stacking conditions will need to be replaced every 3-4 years anyway, so the impact of a total loss in, say, year 2 
for of its life - caused by urban flooding – makes the need for major adaptation investments less compelling. 
 
31. 
One should note that calculations of expected values of disaster impacts – based on some assumed return 
period – underestimate the potential impacts on economic returns. Thus if, for example, a 20 year flood would 
destroy a generating station, calculating the impact as a corresponding expected value does not capture the 
actual impact on returns were that event to occur, say, in the second or third year of operation.  The financial 
impact on an ESP would be greater still. 
 
32. 
The framework for assessing the impact of climate change and disaster resilience has the following steps: 
 
• 
Calculation of economic returns under baseline conditions 
• 
Definition of a plausible scenario for chronic impacts of severe climate change (such as higher ambient 
temperatures) combined with a disaster occurring in the early years of a project – in our case, for 
example, a flooding event that requires replacement of the diesels, control equipment and transformers 
in year 2 of operation – in both the with and without project cases.   
• 
For the project case, add the adaptation costs that would avoid the impact of the disaster, and mitigate 
the chronic impacts. 
• 
Assume that the adaptation costs are also implemented in the counterfactual 
 
33. 
The methodology has been applied to a typical PV hybridization project, with the results shown in Table 
3.8 (other projects would have similar results). The ERR in step 2 decreases from 43 percent to 33 percent given 
the assumption of a flooding event in an unprotected site. The event is assumed to occur as well in the 
counterfactual. Under step 3 we assume the hybridization project implements flood protection measures for 
the site, and stronger PV panel supports, leading to an increased ERR of 56percent - higher than in the baseline 
step 1. The increased ERR is because in the counterfactual the site remains unprotected against the flood event. 
If one assumes that the counterfactual also involves building a flood protection, then the ERR reduces to 43 
percent. Thus, even under conservative assumptions, the ERR is unaffected despite the upfront adaptation 
expenses.  Whether the additional expense would be warranted can only be assessed once the details of the 
site are known. 
Table 3.8. Impact of Climate Change and Adaptation Costs 
 
Step 1 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Step 4 
 
Baseline 
Baseline 
+ 
damage 
costs 
+adaptation 
costs 
+adaptation 
costs 
+counterfactual 
mitigation 
 
No 
climate 
With 
climate 
With 
climate 
With climate 
change
=== PAGE 88 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 82 of 95 
 
     
 
change 
change 
change 
ERR 
43% 
33% 
56% 
43% 
NPV, US$ million (4% discount rate) 
2.5 
1.90 
2.61 
2.27 
 
34. 
We conclude that notwithstanding the high level of uncertainty in the input assumptions, the resilience 
of the proposed project interventions to severe climate change is high. The worst-case climate change scenario 
- in which a disaster event occurs in year 2 - does not threaten the economic viability of any of the proposed 
project investments.
=== PAGE 89 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 83 of 95 
 
     
 
ANNEX 4:  Gender Action Plan 
 
1. 
Overview. Gender inequality in the county is prevalent; The major causes of gender inequalities include 
illiteracy, which affects 75 percent of women, and social and cultural norms, which define how women and men 
are treated from early stages of life, in family settings, and in the community at large48. Further, the inequalities 
have been influenced by civil conflicts, political instability, extreme poverty, prolonged droughts, food 
insecurity, limited access to health services, and negative religious and cultural practices. As a result of the 
prolonged war and conflict in Somalia, female-headed households in Somalia are reported to range from 44 
percent to 66 percent,49 and such households are more likely to be poor and vulnerable. Data and statistics 
regarding gender gaps, including in the energy sector, are very limited, representing a constraint to tackling such 
issues. However, available data shows the gap is wide. In the Gender Inequality Index (2012) report, the country 
registered a score of 0.776 (with a maximum of 1 denoting complete inequality), placing Somalia at the fourth 
highest in gender inequality globally. Moreover, women in the country are being affected more by conflict and 
violence, inhibiting their potential to exit poverty. The energy sector represents a channel to invest in gender 
equality and foster positive development outcomes50. 
 
2. 
Demand-side. Approximately 97 percent of urban households in in the country depend on biomass fuels 
such as charcoal for cooking and other household needs, while rural households depend on firewood51. The 
burden of cooking and searching for fuels for cooking tends to fall on women and girls in the household. The 
use of firewood impacts the health of women negatively for several reasons, including exposure to indoor 
pollution. In addition, searching for firewood and charcoal is time consuming. As a result, lack of access to 
reliable and clean electricity limits women’s ability to engage in economic activities and negatively affects the 
income-generating capacity of those women engaged in productive activities. For instance, end-use appliances 
that could increase productivity of women-owned businesses require modern energy such as electricity, and 
the lack thereof results to productivity losses. Further, lack of reliable and quality electricity service impacts the 
delivery of public services that positively affect women. For instance, lack of street lighting makes women 
vulnerable to gender-based violence GBV), especially if the women work late hours. During the consultations in 
Somaliland, most women indicated they are home by 7pm due to lack of street lighting. Limited access to 
reliable electricity in public facilities and institutions also hinders socioeconomic development. In Somalia, public 
schools lack access to electricity due to affordability. In addition, health facilities that do not have access to 
electricity are not able to provide quality nighttime health service such as child delivery, which has contributed 
to the increase of high maternal mortality rates of 732 deaths per 100,000 births in Somalia. 
 
3. 
Supply Side. Approximately 23.1 percent of women between the age of 15 and 64 are working in Somalia52 
when compared to 76.3 percent for men53. While the proportion of women graduates with STEM degrees is less 
 
48 UNFPA Somalia (2016), ‘Population Estimation Survey 2014, Analytical Report Vol. 2   
49 UNFPA Somalia (2016), ‘Population Estimation Survey 2014, Analytical Report Vol. 2   
50 UNFPA Somalia (2016), ‘Population Estimation Survey 2014, Analytical Report Vol. 2   
51 UNFPA Somalia (2016), ‘Population Estimation Survey 2014, Analytical Report Vol. 2   
52 International Labour Organization. “Labor Force Participation Rate, Female (percentage of Female Population Ages 15–64) 
(modeled ILO estimate): Somalia.” World Bank data. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.ACTI.FE.ZS?locations=SO. 
53 International Labour Organization. “Labor Force Participation Rate, Female (% of Female Population Ages 15–64) (modeled 
ILO estimate): Somalia.” World Bank data. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.ACTI.FE.ZS?locations=SO. O
=== PAGE 90 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 84 of 95 
 
     
 
than 10 percent, the number of women graduates in STEM fields increased by 19 percent from 2009 to 2013 
when compared to a 9 percent increase in women graduates with non-STEM54 degrees. However, the 
employment of Somali women in STEM fields lags behind that of men. Cultural and social norms govern 
women’s employment especially in the energy sector, as the norms determine what constitutes acceptable 
forms of work and employment for women and for men. Somali women employed in the energy sector work 
mostly in administrative and nontechnical fields, while the technical fields tend to be male dominated. As gender 
norms are changing, Somali women are now entering vocations that have been predominantly male, including 
engineering and technical positions. However, negative perceptions of women in technical positions could 
hinder women from being gainfully employed in the energy sector. Persistent gender barriers and lack of equal 
opportunity strategies, policies and legal frameworks negatively impact the retention of women employed in 
technical fields in the energy sector55. Consultations showed that electricity service providers (ESP) viewed 
employment of women engineers as a risk due to potential work gaps that might occur when women take 
maternity leave or care for family needs. While the Somalia, Somaliland, and Puntland ESPs have maternity 
leave policies, policies to provide work-life balance are lacking reinforcement, especially in the private sector. 
ESPs also expressed issues of safety when women engineers work in the field, as women’s cultural profile 
presents safety risks. While women-owned ESPs are more likely to employ women engineers, only 6 percent of 
ESPs are owned by females in Somalia. The FGS and government of Somaliland are cognizant of the existing 
gender disparities, such that the Somalia Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR) and Somaliland 
Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MoEM) have started the integration of genders in the energy sector, but the 
process is in early stages. 
 
4. 
The Gender Action Plan for this project is designed to close the gender disparities in employment in the 
energy sector by challenging gender and social norms associated with women studying and pursuing careers in 
STEM fields. The gender actions to address gender disparities are (i) conducting detailed multisectoral diagnostic 
gender assessment; (ii) pilot incubator for women’s employment; (iii) Gender Capacity Building plans will be 
developed to ensure that women in Somalia and Somaliland are fully engaged in the opportunities provided by 
the energy sector, leading to socioeconomic development of both countries.  
 
a) Detailed Gender Diagnostic Assessment. Understanding the specific gender gaps of the energy sector is 
critical to designing interventions that narrow the existing disparities. Given that the constraints are 
evident throughout the lifecycle of a woman, MoEWR and MoEM conducted a gender diagnostic 
assessment that identified four critical areas to focus on in order to increase women’s employment in 
the energy sector: pipeline (education), skills training, employment entry and retention, and policy and 
legal framework. Plans are under way to conduct a detailed multisectoral diagnostic gender assessment 
in addition to the employment sector. 
 
b) Pilot incubator for women’s employment. Based on the diagnostic gender assessment, it was evident 
that women graduating in STEM fields lack the skills that would facilitate employment in the sector. The 
pilot incubator will be a training facility under MoEWR and MoEM that will provide hard and soft skills 
to women who have graduated in STEM fields. The facility will also provide training to employers in the 
energy sector to ensure their human resource policies and work environments are conducive to helping 
 
54 Somali STEM Society. “Welcome to Somali STEM Society.” http://www.somalistemsociety.org/ 
55 Somali STEM Society. “Welcome to Somali STEM Society.” http://www.somalistemsociety.org/
=== PAGE 91 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 85 of 95 
 
     
 
women engineers succeed. The pilot incubator will also provide placement services to assist women 
with employment search as well as track the employment records of the women who received training 
through the incubator.  
 
c) Detailed Gender Action Plans. Upon the completion of the Gender Diagnostic Assessment, Detailed 
Gender Action Plans will be developed, under the MoEM and MoEWR to address closing the gender 
gaps identified in the assessment. In addition, Gender Capacity Building plans will be developed to 
ensure that women are fully engaged in the opportunities provided by the energy sector, leading to 
socioeconomic development of both countries.   
 
5. 
Gender Actions. MoEWR and MoEM have conducted gender diagnostic assessments to identify specific 
gender gaps within the energy sector particularly barriers that limit career progression of women within the 
energy sector. The assessments have identified four critical areas that should be considered: (a) pipeline 
(education sector), (b) skills-training, (c) women’s employment and retention in the energy sector, and (d) the 
policy and legal framework to support women’s employment. The Project Implementation Units (PIUs) have 
developed terms of reference (ToR) to hire local focal points for gender issues in Somalia and Somaliland to 
support the development of Gender Action and Capacity-Building Plans and support gender integration during 
project implementation. In order to close the gender disparities between the skills of women engineer 
graduates and men and increase the gender capacity in the energy sector, the MoEWR and MoEM will pilot a 
Women in Energy incubator and accelerator for women’s employment. It will help bridge the gap between 
graduation from university and employment by training women engineers with soft and practical skills to work 
in technical fields within the energy sector. The incubator concept was motivated by the Women in Energy 
internship program, which was piloted in 2016 by the USAID-sponsored Growth, Employment, Enterprise and 
Livelihood (GEEL) project to prepare women engineering graduates for employment; the program will end in 
September 2021. The GEEL program’s main objective was to bridge the gap by providing women with internship 
opportunities with ESPs to acquire practical skills for working in the sector. While the GEEL project was not 
evaluated, consultations showed increased competency and self-confidence among interns. The incubator 
participants will be provided mentoring, networking, coaching opportunities, leadership training, and other soft 
skills that will help women engineers to advance career ladders to management positions within the sector. It 
will also provide placement services and track the employment of the program participants, an aspect not 
offered in the GEEL program. In addition, the program will work with the ESPs and other employers in the energy 
sector to provide environments that are conducive to women engineers thriving, including providing flexible 
work schedules. The project plans to work with stakeholders in the legal and policy arena to provide a 
framework conducive to women engineers’ career advancement. Studies show that removing barriers that 
constrain women from entering technical fields, where the income is higher than in traditional female-
dominated fields, would result in a win-win situation for women and the enterprises. However equal 
opportunity policies and strategies need to be implemented. The grievance redress mechanism for the project 
will also include gender-sensitive channels to ensure women are able to submit their grievances, especially in 
situations of GBV, sexual exploitation, and abuse. Table 4.1 and 4.2 summarize the Gender Action Plan by project 
component.   
 
6. 
Monitoring and Evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation will include intermediate indicators as follows: 
(a) the number/percentage of women and men engineering graduates employed in the energy sector (Women’s
=== PAGE 92 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 86 of 95 
 
     
 
Employment), (b) completion of Diagnostic Gender Assessment, and (c) design and implementation of Women 
of Energy Incubator (Yes/No). The other indicators to track progress include number/percentage of female 
graduates admitted to the Women of Energy Incubator, number/percentage of ESPs employing women 
engineers, and Gender Action Plan or Gender Capacity-Building Plan (Yes/No). The intermediate indicators will 
be included in the Results Framework, while the remaining indicators will be included in the Project Operations 
Manual. The grievance redress mechanism will collect sex-disaggregated data to ensure that the grievances 
affecting women related to the project are addressed accordingly. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 show the results indicators 
by project component.  
Table 4.1. SESRP Gender Action Plan  
KEY GENDER GAPS 
ACTIONS 
INDICATORS 
EXPECTED OUTCOMES 
RESPONSIBLE UNIT 
Component 3 – Electricity services for improved public services delivery (Health and Education) 
Health facilities lack 
reliable electricity 
needed to provide 
healthy deliveries 
leading to high 
maternal mortality 
rates  
Prioritizing 
electrification of 
health facilities that 
provide maternal 
health services 
 
Number of women 
receiving quality 
maternal health care 
Decrease in maternal 
mortality rates 
 
MOEWR, MoEM in 
partnership with 
Ministry of Health 
 
Public education 
facilities lack reliable 
electricity, which limits 
learning opportunities 
for women 
Prioritize 
electrification of 
tertiary educational 
facilities that 
provide non-formal 
education (NFE). 
 
Develop incentives 
for TVET institutions 
to provide access to 
women to study 
STEM courses 
Number of women 
graduating from non-
formal education 
courses and tertiary 
institutions 
 
Number of women 
enrolled STEM fields in 
vocational training 
(TVET) institutions 
Decrease in illiteracy 
rates among adult 
women  
MOEWR, MoEM 
 in partnership with 
Ministry of 
Education 
Component 4: Build Capacity for Gender Integration in the Energy Sector 
The Ministry does not 
have gender action 
plan, gender capacity 
building plan and a 
gender strategy 
 
Complete a detailed 
Gender Diagnostic 
Assessment 
 
 
Detailed Gender 
Diagnostic Assessment 
completed 
 
Develop Gender 
Action Plan  
 
Develop Gender 
Capacity Building Plan 
 
Develop a gender 
strategy 
 
Gender Compendium 
to the Electricity Act 
MOEM, MOEWR
=== PAGE 93 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 87 of 95 
 
     
 
Table 4.2 Component 4 - Gender Action Plan based on Preliminary Gender Diagnostic Assessment of 
the Employment Sector (additional actions under Component 4) 
Area of 
assessment  
Key Gender Gaps 
Actions 
Indicators  
Expected 
Outcomes 
Responsible 
Unit 
Pipeline 
(education)  
Underrepresentation 
of women studying 
science, engineering, 
technology and 
mathematics (STEM) in 
higher education 
institutions 
 
Ministry-oriented career 
activities to promote 
opportunities for women 
in the energy sector 
 
Work with higher 
education institutions to 
provide incentives, such 
as scholarships, to 
increase number of 
women studying STEM 
fields 
Number of 
women 
graduating with 
STEM degrees 
Increase in 
number of women 
graduating with 
STEM degrees, 
especially 
electrical 
engineering 
MoEM, 
MoEWR 
In 
partnership 
with 
Ministry of 
Education 
Skills Gap 
Women engineering 
graduates do not have 
adequate skills to work 
in technical positions in 
the energy sector 
Implementation of a pilot 
Women in Energy 
Incubator/training 
program to provide 
practical and soft skills, 
mentoring and placement 
services to women who 
graduate with electrical 
engineering degrees.  
Number of 
women with 
STEM fields 
enrolled and 
graduating from 
incubator/training 
program 
 
Number of 
women engineers 
entering the 
energy sector  
Increase in 
number of women 
graduating with 
electrical 
engineering 
degrees entering 
the energy sector  
MoEM, 
MoEWR 
Employment 
Human Resource (HR) 
policies in the private 
sector are not 
conducive to women’s 
employment 
Consultation with 
Electricity Regulation 
Commission (Somaliland) 
to review policies 
affecting women’s 
employment in the 
energy sector 
 
Develop a comprehensive 
strategy to engage ESPs 
to mainstream gender  
Assessment of HR 
policies 
supporting 
women’s 
employment in 
the private sector   
Public-private 
dialogue on 
human resource 
policies conducive 
to women’s 
employment in 
the energy sector 
MoEM, 
MoEWR 
 
Policy  
Lack of policy and legal 
framework supporting 
women’s employment  
Technical assistance to 
review legal and policy 
framework for women’s 
employment in the 
private sector 
 
Consultation with 
women’s groups on the 
policy and legal 
framework for women’s 
employment 
Assessment of 
policy and legal 
framework 
supporting 
women’s 
employment 
Public-private 
dialogue to 
support policies 
conducive to 
women’s 
employment in 
the energy sector 
 
MoEM, 
MoEWR, In 
partnership 
with 
Ministry of 
Labor
=== PAGE 94 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                 Page 88 of 95 
 
     
 
ANNEX 5: Donor Activities 
 
1. 
The United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) is financing £20 million 
in technical assistance to the government of Somaliland through the Energy Security and Resource Efficient 
in Somaliland (ESRES) project. This includes hybridization of six minigrid projects, with a focus on reducing losses 
(technical and commercial) and the potential for scaling up through the Somaliland Renewable Energy Fund 
(SREF), which will support electricity service providers in developing more hybrid minigrids and possibly support 
captive users such as water authorities and hospitals. 
2. 
The African Development Bank (AfDB) has considered an investment program for Somalia’s energy 
sector.56 It is also currently in discussion with the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to support the creation 
of the Somali Electrification Institute, which would serve an independent federal regulatory body with a 
presence in each Federal Member State for financing the electrification effort. 
3. 
The US Agency for International Development, under its Growth, Enterprise, Employment, and 
Livelihoods (GEEL) project, has supported loss reduction measures in selected energy services providers in 
Somaliland. Power Africa is considering supporting activities in energy policy and regulatory reforms, 
strengthening energy sector donor coordination, strengthening utilities (loss reduction), and unlocking 
investments in solar hybrid generation through a credit guarantee.  
4. 
The United Nations Development Programme is supporting the FGS to strengthen the capacity of the 
Energy Coordination Unit (ECU). This entails development of an investment climate report for the energy sector 
based on the country’s Power Master Plan and in line with the National Development Plan. It has also included 
the planning of the Somalia Energy Investment Forum 2020 to fast-track investments in the renewable energy 
sector. 
5. 
The Swedish Embassy is supporting a four-year energy sector development program. This follows a 
strategy of shifting focus from Somaliland into the wider south-central area of Somalia, where there are greater 
needs. The Swedish International Development Agency is providing financing for the Renewable Energy, 
Adaptation and Climate Change Technology sub-Saharan Africa Sub-Saharan Africa (REACT SSA) Somalia 
program, with the Africa Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF) as implementing agency.  
 
56 The Somalia Infrastructure Trust Fund for AfDB’s Project Pipeline proposed construction of medium voltage grid for Baidoa, 
Burao, and Kismayu. It had also proposed the repair and rehabilitation of distribution lines in Qardho, Hobyo, and Galkayo. AfDB 
also proposed a household energy project for Mogadishu and clean cooking solutions.
=== PAGE 95 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 89 of 95 
     
 
 
1. 
The 2021 Least Cost Geospatial Electrification analysis outlines different scenarios for achieving universal 
electricity access by 2030 in Somalia using an integrated approach to technology deployment, encompassing grid, 
minigrid, and solar home systems (SHS) solutions. The scenarios considered were informed by the recommendations of 
the 2019 Power Master Plan for the establishment of a national integrated power infrastructure. They include (a) 
business as usual (minigrids and SHS only), (b) establishment of a subregional transmission backbone, and (c) 
establishment of a national transmission backbone. The scenarios were developed to identify options for the nation-
wide optimal deployment of technologies and their investment requirements, informed by the availability of 
endogenous renewable resources. 
2. 
The technologies considered are depicted in table 6.1. The methodology applied followed three main steps: (1) 
Identification of settlements and priority service delivery facilities, (2) demand estimation, and (3) comparison of 
electricity supply options. By 2030, about 21 million people will require access to electricity services, whether through 
grid, minigrid, or off-grid solutions. 
Table 6.1. Five Technology Configurations Employed in the Analysis 
Category 
Definition 
Supply technology 
Grid-connection (Grid) 
Connection to a future potential national grid. 
National Grid 
Minigrid systems (MG) 
 
A system with its own distribution network operating 
independently of the national grid serving multiple 
customers 
Solar PV/Diesel hybrid 
Wind/Diesel Hybrid 
Hydropower 
Stand-alone systems (SA) 
An energy system serving one single customer. 
Solar PV (Solar Home Systems) 
 
3. 
The summary of results for each scenario considered is presented in table 6.2. The investment requirements for 
the non-business-as-usual (BAU) scenario are higher as they include the costs of establishing the transmission backbone 
and substations and added generation capacity needed. They therefore exclude the investments and power trade 
contribution to the establishment of the transmission backbone offered by regional integration. They also exclude the 
full least-cost optimization offered by an integrated grid rollout and related economies of scale. These analyses will be 
conducted under component 4 in SOP I. 
Table 6.2. Summary of Technology Options and Investment Requirements, by Scenario and Beneficiary 
 
Source: MoEWR, MoEM, 2021 
 
Scenario
Technology
Investment needs, US$ 
million
People connected, 
million
Health facilities, %
Education facilities, %
Water points, %
Mini-grids
1,400
9.6 (brownfield) + 2.3 
(greenfield)
55
70
21
SHS
440
9.2
55
30
79
Total 
1,840
21.1
100
100
100
Grid
920
6.2
35
35
5
Mini-grids
1,260
5.7
38
38
15
SHS
430
9.1
27
27
80
Total 
2,610
21.1
100
100
100
Grid
1,480
7.5
25
42
10
Mini-grids
1,220
4.5
30
25
10
SHS
430
9.1
45
33
80
Total 
3,130
21.1
100
100
100
Business as Usual
Sub-regional transmission 
backbone
National transmission 
backbone
ANNEX 6: Least Cost Geospatial Electrification Plan to Achieve Universal Access in Somalia
=== PAGE 96 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 90 of 95 
     
 
4. 
The BAU scenario also highlighted the potential for integrating existing minigrids to optimize access provision and 
decrease connection costs, compared to the establishment of greenfield minigrids. In fact, about 8 million people live 
in locations where there is already an existing medium voltage network, and an additional 200,000 people could be 
connected at an average of US$130 rather than average US$600 estimated for connectivity to an existing or greenfield 
minigrid. As also highlighted by the 2019 Power Master Plan, the establishment an integrated national infrastructure 
offers significant potential cost-savings through generation and distribution network optimization, economies of scale, 
and regional integration with neighboring countries. 
5. 
The “series of projects” and national sector development approaches are considering the opportunities offered 
by the establishment of a transmission backbone in the country, where the subnational one would require fewer 
investment needs (about US$760 million compared to the US$1.3 billion required for the national transmission 
backbone). Additionally, opportunities offered by regional integration for the cofinancing of transmission infrastructure 
development and savings stemming from power imports (compared to the development of endogenous generation 
only) are also being considered. 
6. 
Remarkably, both scenarios including the establishment of a transmission backbone indicate investment needs 
for about US$1.2 billion in greenfield minigrid development. Similarly, US$430 million investments will be required to 
deploy SHS. These result from (1) remoteness of load centers from the grid infrastructure and (2) urgency of providing 
universal access to the Somali population by 2030, whereas the full establishment of a national grid infrastructure will 
require a longer timeframe. Map 6.1 depicts the technology breakdown for universal access by 2030 considering efforts 
for the reestablishment of a national grid. 
Map 6.1. Least-Cost Technology Options for Universal Access with the Establishment of the Subregional Transmission or 
National Backbone Infrastructure  
Subregional transmission                                                                     National backbone 
 
Source: MoEWR, 2021
=== PAGE 97 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 91 of 95 
     
 
 
1. 
A major challenge facing Somalia and one cause of internal displacement is climate-related hazards and shocks, 
including drought and flooding. In 2019, combined impacts of flooding, drought and locusts resulted in an estimated 5.2 
million persons in need to assistance, at a cost estimated at 16.5 percent of gross domestic product. 
2. 
Climate-related hazards and shocks are expected to increase in frequency and severity, causing increasing 
challenges to the nearly half of the population relying on pastoralism, agriculture, and related livelihoods. Somalia 
generates low greenhouse gas emissions (just over 1 percent of global emissions) but was the seventh most vulnerable 
country to climate change (179 out of 188) in 2018. The greatest contributors to this score are very high vulnerability in 
agricultural capacity, low control of corruption, and low regulatory and legal quality. National-level estimates for climate 
changes vary widely but show a median increase in temperature exceeding 3°C by the end of the century, with the 90th 
percentile estimates as high as nearly 6°C. Changes in precipitation show a median value with little deviation from 
current levels except for slight increases in October–December. These changes may exacerbate existing natural hazard 
events (presented in table 7.1), including high risk levels for flooding, landslides, extreme heat. and wildfires in many 
regions. 
Table 7.1. Hazard Risks, according to ThinkHazard, for Somalia (National) and Selected Regions with Current and/or 
Planned Electricity Infrastructure  
Hazard Risks 
 
River 
Flood 
Urban 
Flood 
Coastal 
Flood 
Landslide 
Extreme 
Heat 
Wildfire 
Somalia 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
Shabelle Hoose 
[Mogadishu] 
High 
Very 
Low 
High 
Very Low 
Medium 
High 
[Hargeisa, Berbera] 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
High 
High 
Juba Hoose [Kismayo] 
High 
Very 
Low 
High 
Very Low 
High 
High 
 
3. 
Access to infrastructure is very limited among rural populations and nomadic persons, with notably low access to 
education, markets, and health clinics. These challenges disproportionately impact women, with lower rates of literacy, 
educational attainment, and participation in the labor force. Low rates of electricity access result in high use of biomass 
fuel, which contributes heavily to deforestation and environmental degradation. Petroleum products are used primarily 
for transportation and electricity generation, accounting for approximately 10 percent of energy use. 
Climate Change and Natural Hazard Risks 
4. 
As noted in Table 7.1, Somalia is at high risk for flooding (urban, river and coastal), wildfires, extreme heat, and 
landslides, although these risks do vary geographically. Changes in climate may exacerbate these issues, especially 
related to extreme heat, drought and other temperature-related hazards. Each of these hazards poses challenges for 
consideration in the design, construction and operation of the project assets.  
ANNEX 7: Climate Vulnerability Context
=== PAGE 98 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 92 of 95 
     
 
Project Resilience Considerations 
 
5. 
The project includes four components to connect and augment existing generation and distribution infrastructure, 
expand technical and organizational capacity, integrate the existing infrastructure and promote cleaner electricity 
generation. There are many aspects of this project that enhance the resilience of the existing power network in Somalia, 
with a heavy focus on resilience-building through a set of investments focused on integration and capacity building.  
Resilience “of” Project Considerations 
6. 
The resilience of this project to climate change and natural hazard impacts will depend on the specific materials 
chosen for the construction (and reconstruction) of assets, the siting of the infrastructure, and the operation and 
maintenance schedules followed. As detailed in the preceding hazards section, selecting the transmission and 
distribution lines with steel tubular poles and/or concrete will increase their resistance to damages from flooding, 
wildfires, and other hazards. These options will be considered during project implementation and following adequate 
studies. An additional aspect of the project that increases the resilience to future challenges is the selection of renewable 
energy generation sources, which allows for the expansion of generation technologies not reliant on solid, high-
emissions-generating fuels sources. However, to ensure of the sustainability of the intervention, as noted in the PAD, 
special attention will be paid to the issues related to the lack of supply chains and procurement mechanisms, especially 
related to the supply of photovoltaic and battery systems and local capacity.  
Resilience “through” Project Considerations 
7. 
The focus of this project is on enhancing the resilience of the electricity industry in Somalia and laying the building 
blocks for integration with current regional projects as well as future investments. This entails financing and organization 
within Somalia at the government levels for regulation and operation, as well as at the level of the populations that 
would benefit from increased electricity reliability and availability. Specifically, this project includes the reestablishment 
of the Somalia electricity supply industry, including creation of policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks that would lay 
groundwork for the investments in this project as well as all future endeavors. Many of these aspects of the project can 
be considered to enhance the resilience “through” the project.  
8. 
Component 3 focuses on electrification for priority facilities (health and education). Reliable and adequate 
electricity at these key facilities will have quantifiable benefits for human and rural development. In addition, 
component 4, “Sector capacity enhancement and project implementation capacity support” specifically aims at 
increasing the technical, organizational, operational, and other aspects of operations for the electricity services in 
Somalia. This focus on institutional capacity integration and building complements the investments in components 1 (50 
percent of project resources) and 2 (27 percent of project resources). The retrofitting and construction of assets focuses 
on the synchronization, integration, and improvements in reliability for current operational minigrids. This will provide 
many benefits, including more reliable and higher levels of electricity access for businesses and homes, lower losses of 
load (higher operational efficiency), better resilience to fluctuations within the grid, and many other factors. 
Investments into the renewable generation and battery options may increase fuel efficiency and consumption, extend 
generator lifespans, reduce emissions, and reduce reliance on fuel imports.  
9. 
Finally, it is noted that this project is complementary to several ongoing and planned projects within the region. 
In particular, the proposed project lays building blocks that would enable Somalia to potentially join regional power
=== PAGE 99 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 93 of 95 
     
 
projects including the Horn of Africa Regional Integration for Sustainable Energy Supply project (P174175) currently 
under preparation, which includes an important focus on increasing the resilience of the power sector in partnering 
countries.   
Climate mitigation impact of the project   
10. 
Somalia submitted its first nationally determined contribution (NDC) in November 2015 and remains committed 
to achieve the targets despite its challenges and national circumstances. Consistent with United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change decisions and guidelines, Somalia has taken steps to prepare and submit a revised NDC 
to guide its climate action agenda. With the support of the NDC partnership, it has prepared a mitigation analysis report 
that identifies priorities and costs to inform its upcoming NDC.   
11. 
Sustainable development, energy, and adaptation to climate change remain the highest priority for Somalia. These 
priorities will have to be translated into actions and strategies, but the country has already adopted some key policy and 
regulatory frameworks in the past years that will help its transition toward a lower carbon and climate resilient energy 
sector, including its NDP9 (2020–24) that has an emphasis on reducing deforestation and scaling up clean and renewable 
energy investments to meet the country’s energy demand and drive growth; the National Climate Change Policy (2020) 
that sets out a low emissions development path and identifies actions in all sectors; and the Energy Policy (2018), which 
aims to provide all Somalians with adequate, affordable, and sustainable access to efficient energy. Finally, the Somalia 
Power Master Plan (2019) presents a roadmap for the investments in the energy over a 20-year planning period to meet 
the country’s growing demand, and investments in clean and renewable energy are expected to play a key role.  
12. 
Somalia is one of the countries in Africa that are richly endowed with renewable energy sources (solar, wind, 
geothermal, hydro). However, these are mostly unexploited (less than 10 percent of the energy mix). The country also 
has discovered reserves of oil and natural gas, which remain undrilled. Firewood and charcoal consumption, while 
difficult to precisely estimate, contribute directly to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the energy sector, and inefficient 
cooking contributes to health complications among the vulnerable population, especially women and children, and 
exacerbate gender inequalities. As part of the country’s mitigation efforts, a strong emphasis is placed on clean and 
efficient cooking solutions.  
13. 
Through the updated NDC, Somalia has set a target of 30 percent emissions reductions against the BaU scenario 
by 2030. To achieve this target, Somalia has to reduce its GHG emissions by about 60MtCO2e relative to the BAU 
scenario by 2030. Specifically, for the Energy sector, Somalia would have to reduce 15.25 MtCO2e to meet the updated 
NDC target by undertaking the several interventions requiring about US$ 350 M funding over the NDC period (2021-
2030). Table 7.2 lists the NDC priority areas along with project’s contribution towards their achievement and the GHG 
emissions reduction expected from the project are detailed in the economic and financial analysis.
=== PAGE 100 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 94 of 95 
     
 
Table 7.2. Alignment between NDC priority57 and Project Component 
Energy Sector Targets 
Project Components 
Linkage 
 
Reduce transmission losses by 10 
percent of the current 40 percent 
losses by 2030 
Component 1 – Subtransmission 
and distribution network 
reconstruction, reinforcement, 
and operations efficiency in the 
major load centers of Mogadishu 
and Hargeisa (US$ 75 million) 
 
The activities will support investments in reduction of wet 
stacking 
with 
concurrent 
lower 
fuel 
consumption, 
maintenance costs, and GHG emissions. They will also support 
investment in the subtransmission, and distribution network 
infrastructure required to enable generation synchronization 
in addition to increased network capacity and reduced 
network losses. The subtransmission network and associated 
reinforced distribution network lay a foundation for the 
requisite off-taker infrastructure for large scale incremental 
future generation (bulk supply points and distribution to 
consumers) 
Development of renewable energy 
electricity (Solar and Wind) - At least 
60MW 
 
Component 2 – Hybridization and 
battery 
storage 
systems 
for 
minigrids (US$ 20 million) 
 
This component will support activities aimed at the 
hybridization and optimization of existing diesel-based 
generation facilities. It will support installation of Battery 
Energy Storage Systems (BESS) and solar PV systems at 
existing diesel-based generation stations in selected load 
centers. 
Such 
hybrid 
opportunities 
offer 
significant 
improvements in fuel efficiency, fuel consumption, extended 
generator lifespans, reducing GHG emissions and combustion 
pollution, along with less reliance on fuel imports. 
 
Partially from Component 3 – 
Stand-alone solar off-grid access to 
public institutions (health and 
education) (US$ 40 million). 
This component will support activities to provide electricity to 
existing public facilities in rural and peri-urban areas, 
underpinned by the nation-wide geospatial plan. Key activities 
under this component include new hybrid minigrids and 
stand-alone solar PVSPV systems augmented by BESS 
targeting public institutions as the anchor loads. Where viable 
they will target associated distribution networks to connect 
other loads such as SMEs small and medium enterprises and 
households. Considering that biomass accounts for 96 percent 
of energy sources, this will help replace biomass and kerosene 
use. 
 
N.A. 
N.A. 
 
 
 
 
57 The NDC priorities also include: Clean and energy efficient cookstoves (at least 3 million cookstoves), and renewable lamps replacing 
kerosene lamps (3 million).
=== PAGE 101 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (P173088) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 95 of 95 
     
 
 
1. 
Over the past two years, IFC through the Somali Unlocking Sectoral Investment Project (SUSIP) has facilitated the 
review of the draft Electricity Energy Bill at the Federal Government of Somalia level. The draft law was subjected to 
extensive internal World Bank Group review, resulting in a detailed gap analysis report identifying areas where the law 
needs to be strengthened. For example, there is a need to review (a) the proposed institutional arrangements, (b) 
provisions on funding, (c) arbitrary powers provided for in certain areas, and (d) the anchoring in law incentives relating 
to the expansion of access and key protections. The bill was approved by the cabinet in December 2020 and is currently 
in parliament for approval. The law is currently undergoing stakeholder consultations with subsequent trainings 
scheduled on regulatory reforms. In Somaliland, SUSIP is at present focusing on supporting the Ministry of Energy and 
Minerals and Somaliland Energy Commission to prepare the electricity subsector secondary regulations through an 
inclusive public private dialogue platform by providing legal and regulatory framework development support and 
providing capacity-building support. Table 8.1 shows some of the International Finance Corporation project activities 
currently being undertaken in Somalia.  
Table 8.1 Ongoing IFC Engagement in Somalia 
Project Name 
Objectives 
(i) 
Somali Unlocking Sectoral Investment 
Project (SUSIP) (Project is Focused on 
Somalia and Federal Member State of 
Somaliland)  
 
Overall SUSIP goal is to facilitate private sector growth and investment in prioritized sectors and 
localities. The Project aims to address gaps in policy, regulatory, administrative, and institutional 
frameworks. Specifically, in the respective Energy Sectors in Somalia and Somaliland, SUSIP is 
providing support to strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional framework, specifically 
supporting the government in drafting relevant laws and regulations; (ii); supporting and 
maintaining a Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) platform to facilitate inclusive stakeholder dialogue 
on key policies, laws, and regulations. 
(ii) 
SomInvReady (Focused on Somalia)  
 
Aims to enhance investment readiness of firms in the energy sector and increase their capacity 
to meet investment due diligence requirements, i.e. international standards of Corporate 
Governance, Environmental and Social standards, Risk Management, Transparency, Financial 
and Prudential reporting including all other key elements for commercial financing and FDI. 
(iii) Somalia Electricity Service Providers (SESP) 
 
Technical assistance for ESPs – Support key ESPs by reviewing their business plans, providing 
technical guidance for solar PV and battery storage options & reduction of distribution losses. 
The project also aims to attract international developers interested in investing in the Somalia 
Power sector and provide support in developing business models that are suitable for the local 
market. 
(iv) Somalia Public Private Partnership (PPP)  
Project with the Ministry of Finance that seeks to create a foundation for the private sector 
participation in the development of targeted infrastructure projects through public-private 
partnerships (PPPs). The project aims for enactment and implementation of prioritized 
law/regulations on public-private partnerships and support to the Federal Government to utilize 
the enacted law and regulations to approve at least two projects for due diligence.  
 
ANNEX 8: IFC Support to Somali Energy Sector
