=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD00140  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION  
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT  
ON A  
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 37.7 MILLION 
(US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND 
 
CO-FINANCED BY A GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$5 MILLION 
FROM THE GLOBAL PROGRAM FOR THE BLUE ECONOMY (PROBLUE) MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALI SUSTAINABLE FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT “BADMAAL” PROJECT 
 
 
MAY 20, 2024 
 
 
Environment, Natural Resources and the Blue Economy Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective February 29, 2024) 
 
Currency Unit =  
SDR 
SDR 0.75 =  
US$1 
US$1.32 =  
SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Regional Director: Iain G. Shuker 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Practice Manager: Noreen Beg (Acting) 
Task Team Leaders: Julien Million, Stephen Ling
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AIS 
Automatic Identification System 
BaU 
Business as Usual 
BRA 
Banadir Regional Administration 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
COAPM 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedures Manual 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DA 
Designated Account 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EEZ 
Exclusive Economic Zone 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
FAO 
Food and Aquaculture Organization 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FI 
Financial Intermediaries 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMC 
Fisheries Monitoring Center 
FMDC 
Fisheries Management and Development Council 
FMP 
Fisheries Master Plan 
FMS 
Federal Member State (s) 
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEEL 
Growth, Enterprise, Employment & Livelihoods 
GHG 
Greenhouse gas 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IOTC 
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IUU 
Illegal Unregulated and Reported 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MCS 
Monitoring, Control and Surveillance 
MFBE 
Ministry of Fisheries and Blue Economy of the Federal Government of Somalia 
MFD 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
MPA 
Marine Protected Areas 
MSMEs 
Micro-Small-Medium Enterprises 
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action 
NBS 
Nature Based Solution 
NCCC 
National Climate Change Committee 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NPC 
National Project Coordinator 
NDP-9 
Somalia Ninth National Development Plan 
PA 
Paris Alignment 
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition 
PCE 
Private Capital Enabling / Private Capital Enabled 
PERSGA 
Regional Organization for the Conservation of the Environment of the Red Sea and 
the Gulf of Aden 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PMU 
Project Management Unit
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
 
PPA 
Project Preparation Advance 
PSMA 
Port State Measures Agreement 
RFMO 
Regional Fisheries Management Organization 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment 
SFMIS 
Somali Financial Management Information System 
SoE 
Statements of Expenditure 
SPC 
State Project Coordinator 
SSTs 
Sea Surface Temperatures 
SWIOFC 
Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UNCLOS 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
VMS 
Vessel Monitoring System 
WBG 
World Bank Group
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET .......................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 8 
A. Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 8 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................... 9 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................13 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................ 15 
A. Project Development Objective .....................................................................................................15 
B. Project Components ......................................................................................................................15 
C. Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................................20 
D. Results Chain ..................................................................................................................................20 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ...................................................................21 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ....................................................................22 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................................... 23 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................23 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ........................................................................24 
C. Sustainability ..................................................................................................................................24 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 25 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................25 
B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................26 
C. Legal Operational Policies ..............................................................................................................28 
D. Environmental and Social ..............................................................................................................29 
V. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES .................................................................................... 30 
VI. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 31 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING .................................................................. 34 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................ 42 
ANNEX 2: Climate Co-Benefits Assessment ......................................................................... 50 
ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis ......................................................................... 57 
ANNEX 4: Provisional median/equidistance line between Somali and Yemen ...................... 60 
ANNEX 5: Map of Somalia ................................................................................................... 61
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 1 of 61  
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate 
DATASHEET 
BASIC INFORMATION 
Project 
Beneficiary(ies) 
Operation Name 
Somalia 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project - Badmaal 
Operation ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
 
P178032 
Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) 
High 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
12-Jun-2024 
30-Jun-2030 
Bank/IFC Collaboration 
 
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity of targeted communities and authorities to benefit from 
and effectively manage selected fisheries 
Components
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 2 of 61  
 
Component Name 
Cost (US$) 
Increasing the Capacity of Dependent Communities to Benefit from 
Sustainable Marine Fisheries 
27,085,000.00 
Strengthening Marine Fisheries Governance and Management 
20,060,000.00 
Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation 
7,855,000.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate 
Organizations 
Borrower:  
Federal Republic of Somalia 
Implementing Agency:  
Ministry of Fisheries and Blue Economy of the Federal Republic of Somalia 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?  
Yes 
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)? 
Yes 
 
SUMMARY 
Total Operation Cost 
55.00  
Total Financing 
55.00  
of which IBRD/IDA 
50.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00  
DETAILS 
World Bank Group Financing 
   
International Development Association (IDA) 
50.00 
IDA Grant 
50.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
   
Trust Funds 
5.00 
PROBLUE MDTF 
5.00
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 3 of 61  
 
IDA Resources (US$, Millions) 
  
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
Total 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate 
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions) 
WB Fiscal 
Year 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
Annual 
12.50 
17.00 
12.50 
5.50 
4.00 
1.50 
Cumulative 
12.50 
29.50 
42.00 
47.50 
51.50 
53.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate 
PRACTICE AREA(S) 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy 
 
CLIMATE 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫   High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫   Substantial
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 4 of 61  
 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫   High 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫   Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫   High 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫   High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫   High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫   Substantial 
9. Overall 
⚫   High 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate 
POLICY COMPLIANCE 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts 
Relevant 
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved 
Traditional Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage 
Relevant
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 5 of 61  
 
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate 
LEGAL 
Legal Covenants 
Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(a). The Recipient shall designate by no later than one month after the Effective Date, and 
thereafter maintain throughout the period of Project implementation, the Director-General Technical Working Group 
(DG-TWG) to serve as the Project steering committee, with composition, terms of reference and resources satisfactory 
to the Association (the “Project Steering Committee” or “PSC”), which shall be: (i) chaired by the director general of the 
MFBE, and comprised among others, of the directors-general of fisheries of the FMS and Benadir Regional 
Administration (BRA); and (ii) vested with such powers, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association as 
further detailed in the Project Operations Manual, as shall be required to, inter alia: (A) provide policy direction and 
guidance to the PMU for the implementation of the Project; and (B) review and approve the Annual Work Plans and 
Budgets and Project Reports.  
Schedule 2, Section I.E(a). The Recipient shall prepare and furnish to the Association on an annual basis, by no later than 
October 31 of each year, the annual work plan and budget containing all activities proposed to be included in the 
Project during the following Fiscal Year, and a proposed financing plan (setting forth the proposed amounts and sources 
of financing) for expenditures required for such activities; provided that the Annual Work Plan and Budget for the first 
year of Project implementation shall be prepared and furnished to the Association, not later than one (1) month after 
the Effective Date;  
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate 
Conditions 
Type 
Citation 
Description 
Financing Source 
Effectiveness 
Article V. Section 5.01 (a) 
The Recipient has prepared 
and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual, in form 
and substance satisfactory 
to the Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Effectiveness 
Article V. Section 5.01 (b) 
The PROBLUE Grant 
Agreement has been duly 
executed and delivered, 
and all conditions 
precedent to its 
effectiveness, or to the 
right of the Recipient to 
make withdrawals under it 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 6 of 61  
 
(other than the 
effectiveness of this 
Agreement), have been 
fulfilled 
Effectiveness 
Article V. Section 5.01 
The Financing Agreement 
has been executed and 
delivered and all conditions 
precedent to its 
effectiveness or the right of 
the Recipient to make 
withdrawals under it (other 
than the effectiveness of 
this Agreement) have been 
fulfilled 
Trust Funds 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2. Section 
III.B.1(a) 
No withdrawal shall be 
made for payments made 
prior to the Signature Date 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2. Section 
III.B.1(b) 
No withdrawal shall be 
made under Categories (1), 
(2) and (3) unless and until 
the Recipient has: (i) 
prepared, consulted upon, 
adopted and publicly 
disclosed the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Framework 
(including the Labor 
Management Procedures 
and the SEA/SH Prevention 
and Response Action Plan), 
Resettlement Policy 
Framework, Security 
Management Framework, 
Sectoral Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment, 
and template 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plans, in form 
and substance satisfactory 
to the Association and (ii) 
established an accessible 
grievance mechanism for 
the Project, in form and 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 7 of 61  
 
substance satisfactory to 
the Association 
Disbursement 
Schedule. Section II.B.1(a) 
No withdrawal shall be 
made for payments made 
prior to the Signature Date 
Trust Funds 
Disbursement 
Schedule. Section II.B.1(b) 
under Categories (1) and 
(2) unless and until the 
Recipient has: (i) prepared, 
consulted upon, adopted 
and publicly disclosed the 
Environmental and Social 
Management Framework 
(including the Labor 
Management Procedures 
and the SEA/SH Prevention 
and Response Action Plan), 
Resettlement Policy 
Framework, Security 
Management Framework, 
Sectoral Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment, 
and template 
Environmental and Social 
Management Plans, in form 
and substance satisfactory 
to the Association; and (ii) 
established an accessible 
grievance mechanism for 
the Project, in form and 
substance satisfactory to 
the Bank 
Trust Funds
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 8 of 61  
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
After more than two decades of civil unrest, Somalia has taken steps towards stability, reconstruction, poverty 
reduction and inclusive growth. The 2012 Provisional Constitution established the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
consisting of currently five Federal Member States (FMS) and the capital, Mogadishu, is governed by the Banadir Regional 
Administration (BRA). Institution-building efforts and fiscal reforms are improving governance and placing the country on 
a stronger development trajectory. However, the FGS and FMS still face political contestation on core constitutional 
matters and resource distribution, and domestic revenue remains insufficient to fund expenditures on security and 
development needs. Limited presence of FGS and FMS agencies outside urban areas, conflict, insecurity, and humanitarian 
challenges including terrorist groups’ attacks, mostly in Mogadishu and in southern Somalia, continue to constrain private 
sector investment and delivery of public services relief efforts affecting poverty and economic growth. 
 
2. 
Somalia is one of the poorest countries in the world with a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) estimated 
at US$592 in 2022, the seventh lowest in the world1. Growth is mainly consumption-driven, with fisheries having a minor 
role. Telecommunications and money transfer services are the key growth sectors enabled by large remittances and aid 
inflows. Governance and transparency should be strengthened to propel equitable private sector-driven growth. Public 
revenue generation remains an ongoing challenge, but annual domestic FGS revenue rose from US$143 million to US$263 
million (2.3 percent of GDP) from 2017 to 20222. Somalia reached the completion point of the Heavily Indebted Poor 
Countries (HIPC) Initiative in December 2023, with the country receiving US$4.5 billion in debt relief. 
 
3. 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to climate change and has faced persistent humanitarian crises for decades with 
associated resource depletion. Throughout 2022 and for five consecutive seasons, low rainfall has exacerbated severe 
drought conditions in terms of severity, duration, and scale.3 Somalia is a chronic food crop deficit country, dependent on 
remittances and humanitarian assistance to finance food consumption and imports Small urban and rural coastal 
communities are particularly prone to high levels of food insecurity due as they often face crises or emergencies 
throughout the year4, living in harsh and isolated environments with poor sanitation, health, and educational services. In 
coastal areas, a lack of rain may impact the reproduction of some stocks, e.g., shrimp near river mouths, leading to 
economic and food security stress for some fishing communities.5 Extreme weather events due to climate change will 
exacerbate these challenges, including in coastal areas. Climate impacts such as drought and flooding lead to failed crops 
and loss of livestock, exacerbating these challenges in coastal areas. Somalia’s long coastline is home to valuable marine 
resources which can contribute to food security and economic growth. However, the fishery sector needs climate-resilient 
and sustainable management of offshore and in coastal areas.   
 
4. 
Piracy in Somalia has considerably reduced since 2012 but remains a potential threat. Piracy in Somalia was 
initially linked to illegal fishing activities that emerged after the collapse of the central government in 1991.6 In 2007, due 
 
1 World Bank: World Development Indicator (https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators, accessed April 7, 2024) 
2 World Bank, 2024. Somalia Country Partnership Framework FY24-28. Report Number 187254-SO), discussed by the Board on February 29, 2024. 
3 World Bank, 2023. Somalia Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: Accelerating the Building of Inclusive Institutions for Resilience and Jobs 
(https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/fc6ee8a6-be32-468c-b396-e94b7d202aad) 
4 Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC). Somalia Acute Food Acute Food Insecurity Situation (https://www.ipcinfo.org/ipc-country-
analysis/details-map/en/c/1156834/?iso3=SOM) 
5 FAO, 2023. Addressing the hidden impact of the drought crisis among Somalia’s fishing communities (https://www.fao.org/somalia/news/detail-
events/ar/c/1646992/).  
6 World Bank. 2013. The Pirates of Somalia: Ending the Threat, Rebuilding a Nation. Washington, DC. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16518  .
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 9 of 61  
 
to political instability, economic hardships, and the absence of effective governance in the region, armed groups took 
advantage of the lawlessness at sea, hijacking commercial vessels for ransom. The crisis rapidly expanded, peaked and 
triggered a response by the international community which deployed naval forces in the region and Somali Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) to patrol the waters off Somalia and deter pirate activities since 2008. These efforts, along with 
increased security measures by the shipping industry and improved local governance, contributed to a significant decline 
in piracy incidents by the mid-2010s. However, recent incidents in late 2023 and early 2024, fuel fears of piracy resurgence, 
and highlight the need to stabilize coastal communities through employment and economic growth. 
 
5. 
Gender inequality and Gender Based Violence (GBV) are prevalent in Somalia. The recent World Bank Somalia 
Women’s Empowerment Options Paper 7 note that GBV including Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual 
Harassment (SEA/SH) remains a challenge and is driven by pervasive insecurity, increased vulnerability and displacement. 
Studies suggest that about three-quarters of GBV/SEAH survivors are internally displaced persons; some of these survivors 
work in the fisheries sector.8 
 
6. 
Despite the challenges, several factors offer entry points for the fisheries sector to contribute to development 
and poverty alleviation. These include a young population, rapid urbanization which can together create service sector 
jobs; rapid integration of ICT technologies and financial services for entrepreneurs, including in the fisheries sector, and 
present opportunities to “leapfrog” towards financial inclusion, e-government, and digital entrepreneurship. These 
opportunities can be linked to a vibrant private sector connected to a global diaspora network that considers fisheries as 
an economic growth area; and economic integration efforts in the broader Horn of Africa and Red Sea region and a 
productive marine ecosystem. These general development opportunities could also enable stronger management and 
micro-small-medium sized enterprises (MSME) development in the Somali fisheries sector. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. 
Somalia’s fisheries resources are extensive, productive and diverse. Strong seasonal upwelling off Somalia’s 
Indian Ocean coast provides one of the most productive marine ecosystems in the world with numerous fish and shellfish 
species, including valuable pelagic tuna resources. Conversely, its narrow continental shelf (Annex 5) limits shallow-water 
habitat and therefore the abundance of demersal species. Reliable data is scarce, but it is estimated that annual domestic 
catch is around 50,000 tons since 2010, while catches by foreign fleets are estimated to be around 100,000 tons.9 Surveys 
in the 70s and 80s estimated potential production to be significantly higher, with the latest estimates at 600,000 and 
835,000 tons. 1011 Some demersal stocks (e.g., sharks, lobster, grouper, and snappers) may be showing signs of 
overexploitation, especially near urban centers where fishing activity and demand is higher.12 Small pelagic resources are 
thought to be underutilized within Somali waters, although the large pelagic tuna stocks are assessed to be overfished at 
a regional level by the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC). 
 
 
7 World Bank, 2023 Somalia Women’s Empowerment Options Paper 
8 UNFPA. Overview of Gender-Based Violence Situation in Somalia - Advocacy Brief, 2022. URL: 
https://somalia.unfpa.org/en/publications/overview-gender-based-violence-situation-somalia-advocacy-brief-2022 
9 Around Us project, https://www.seaaroundus.org  
10 Adeso, 2015. Policy Paper: Improving Development and Management of Somalia’s Marine Fisheries and Controlling Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated (IUU) Fishing 
11 Glaser SM, Roberts PM, Mazurek RH, Hurlburt KJ, and Kane-Hartnett L, 2015. Securing Somali Fisheries. Denver, CO: One Earth Future 
Foundation. 
DOI: 10.18289/OEF.2015.001 
12 Growth, Enterprise, Employment and Livelihoods (GEEL), 2021. Lobster Survey Report
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 10 of 61  
 
8. 
Climate change directly impacts Somali fisheries, reducing fish stocks and changing the marine ecosystems on 
which they depend, through acidification, sea-level rise, higher water temperatures, and changes in ocean currents and 
circulation.13 A 2021 climate and fisheries analysis prepared for the project found that during the Southwest monsoon 
season when the Somali upwelling occurs, mean sea surface temperatures (SSTs) are projected to reach >28°C by 2030, 
>29°C by 2050 and >31°C by 2100. By the end of the century, the study projects that the Somali upwelling zone will become 
about 20 percent less productive overall. Furthermore, the vulnerability of the fisheries is based on cumulative effects of 
climate change, other drivers of change, and human responses. Where a fish stock is already heavily exploited or 
overexploited by unsustainable fishing practice, stress from climate-induced changes in ocean conditions or ecosystems 
may push the stock to a “tipping point,” causing the total collapse of the stock. According to a World Bank study,14 
Somalia’s socioecological risk of climate change to fisheries scores ‘very high’. Declining productivity will be exacerbated 
if habitats and species are not sufficiently protected from fishing pressure. Additionally, Somalia’s average mean surface 
air temperature is projected to increase by 1.9°C in 2040-2059 under a high emission scenario relative to historical 
reference data,15 affecting the entire fishery value chain. Fishery infrastructure and livelihoods of fishing communities will 
also be impacted by high risk of flooding in the coastal areas of Somalia. 16 Climate vulnerability also extend to 
infrastructure and value chains. Higher ambient temperatures will increase the running and maintenance costs of buildings 
and equipment, while increased storm intensity and frequency risks damaging vessels and infrastructure, including post-
harvest facilities. The impacts further risk increased food insecurity and lost livelihoods for coastal communities. The 
climate vulnerability of the Somali fisheries highlights the importance of long-term climate resilience of fisheries by 
maintaining robust fish stock and marine habitats and reducing non-climate stressors through development and 
implementation of climate-resilient fisheries’ management, including capacity building of fishing communities, legal and 
regulatory framework for sustainable fisheries, monitoring control and surveillance to reduce unsustainable fishing 
practice, including illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU)), fisher safety, climate-smart fishery infrastructure, and 
resilient value chains.  
 
9. 
The new 2023 Federal Fisheries Law establishes the basic division of responsibilities among FGS and FMS. The 
Law divides fishing grounds into three zones: 
• 
Fisheries Restricted Zone (0-12nm): constitutes the Territorial Sea of Somalia and is reserved exclusively 
for artisanal fishing and related activities by Somali citizens and Somali vessels of up to 12 meters in length 
overall, and management responsibility lies with the contiguous FMS; 
• 
Fisheries Protection Zone (12-24nm): reserved exclusively for fishing and related activities by Somali 
citizens and Somali vessels of up to 24 meters in length overall. While the contiguous FMS will have the 
right to issue licenses for artisanal fishing vessels, other management responsibility lies with the FGS; 
• 
Fisheries Exclusive Economic Zone (24-200nm): open to all fisheries and fleet under conditions defined by 
the Fisheries Law (2023) and where management responsibilities lie with the FGS. 
 
10. 
Illegal fishing has been rampant in Somali waters for decades with the value of the catch caught illegally 
estimated between US$100 and US$450 million annually.17 Most of the catch taken by foreign vessels has little to no 
benefit to the Somali economy. Although the great majority of Somali’s demersal fishing grounds lies within 24nm, foreign 
vessels also compete with domestic fisheries for demersal resources along the narrow continental shelf. A fleet of 
industrial trawlers operate under non-transparent agreements with some FMS in violation of the Somali Fisheries Law, 
 
13 Federal Government of Somalia. 2022. Somalia’s First Adaptation Communication to the UNFCCC.   
14 World Bank. 2019. Climate Change and Marine Fisheries in Africa: Assessing Vulnerability and Strengthening Adaptation Capacity. 
15 World Bank. 2024. Climate Change Knowledge Portal. https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/   
16 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). 2024. ThinkHazard! https://thinkhazard.org/en/   
17 Adeso, 2015. Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing in the Territorial Waters of Somalia
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 11 of 61  
 
greatly increasing the risk of overexploitation and marine habitat degradation and threatening the current and future 
potential of the domestic fisheries sector. 
 
11. 
In 2019, Somalia started mobilizing much-needed revenue from fisheries through the issuance of licenses. 
Following a revenue sharing agreement reached between the FGS and FMS, international partners, including the World 
Bank, supported efforts by the FGS to establish a legal and transparent foreign fishing regime in Somali waters beyond 
24nm. Starting in 2019, licenses were issued to 30 Chinese longliners targeting tuna and tuna-like species, generating to 
date approximately US$4 million in annual revenue, partly shared among the FGS and FMS. Somalia did not issue licenses 
between 2020 and 2023. The Ministry of Fisheries and Blue Economy of the Federal Government of Somalia (MFBE) issued 
19 offshore licenses to Chinese tuna longliners in March 2024, generating US$1 million of revenue which was shared with 
the FMS.  
 
12. 
The domestic fishing sector is largely small-scale and primarily using gillnets, handlines and traps and targeting 
high-value species such as spiny lobster, sharks, and demersal and pelagic bony fish. Approximately 122 fish landing sites 
have been identified along the Somali coast. Sectoral statistics are woefully outdated; estimates of the number of fishers 
range from 10,000 fishers to 30,000. In addition, total full and part-time fisheries related indirect employment was 
estimated to be 90,000 people.18 Somali artisanal vessels are made of wood or glass reinforced plastic and 3 to 10 meters 
in length with an estimated 20 percent of this fleet being traditional 4-5 meters wooden houris (canoes).  Most artisanal 
vessels are single-day fishing trip vessels, with the larger Volvo vessels being capable of multi-day trips. A limited number 
of semi-industrial vessels, including dhows, are mostly operated by local investors. The domestic artisanal and semi-
industrial fleets largely operate within 24 nm targeting demersal and large pelagic resources. The main fishing season for 
the domestic fleet extend during the northeast monsoon, between December and February, when sea conditions are 
calm. During the southwest monsoon, May to October, fishing activity from the domestic fleet is reduced due to strong 
and persistent winds and rough sea conditions, and climate change will make the monsoon seasons more unpredictable 
and potentially more damaging to infrastructure and fish production, further risking fisher incomes and livelihoods. 
 
13. 
Somalia participates in regional fisheries management activities through its membership of several Regional 
Fisheries Bodies (RFBs).  Somalia is a member of the Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), the Indian 
Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) and the Regional Organization for the Conservation of the Environment of the Red Sea & 
Gulf of Aden (PERSGA). Somalia compliance rate with IOTC Conservation and Management Measures decreased from 80 
percent in 2015 to 16 percent in 202219 mostly due to a lack of reporting.  
 
14. 
Development of domestic fisheries value chains is limited by poor landing infrastructure, handling and 
processing facilities and equipment, and seasonal rough sea conditions. Valuable spiny lobster export value chains are 
being developed, reaching Middle Eastern and Asian markets by air with scope for expansion with better infrastructure. 
Other potentially high-value seafood products are not as developed and are also constrained by lack or poor 
infrastructure. Improved infrastructure, fishing techniques and handling that incorporate designs, materials, practices, 
and siting to reduce climate change impacts, could reduce post-harvest losses (currently estimated at between 25 percent 
and 40 percent), especially in rural areas. Beyond large coastal cities, an active private sector has invested in fishing, cold 
storage, and processing. However, they struggle to provide larger-scale core investments in landing and cold-storage 
infrastructure. Improvement and development to critical infrastructure, a clearer legal framework and better knowledge 
of stock and production potential, would facilitate further private investment. 
 
 
18 Lovatelli, Alessandro. 1996. EC Rehabilitation Program for Somalia: Artisanal Fisheries. Final Report. European Commission Somalia Unit, Nairobi. 
19 IOTC, 2022. Summary Report on the level of compliance. IOTC-2023-CoC20-03[E]
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 12 of 61  
 
15. 
Somalia’s marine fisheries could make important contributions to local livelihoods, food supply, exports, and 
public revenue generation. In 2012, fisheries’ contribution to GDP was roughly estimated to be around 2 percent. In 2018, 
the World Bank estimated that around 4 percent of employed people worked in fishing. Development agencies estimate 
that export earnings, all of which originate from domestic small-scale landings, range from US$15-20 million, 
predominantly from lobster. Limited recent offshore fishing licensing represented around 1 percent of public revenue. 
However, given the possibilities for license fee collection from offshore international vessels, sustainable increase of 
domestic production, improved handling and access to higher value markets, and revenue collection along the enhanced 
value chains, the potential for increasing the economic contribution of Somali fisheries, as well as making a significant 
contribution to food security, is considered to be substantial.   
 
16. 
Weak governance and the lack of management systems threaten the sustainable exploitation of fish stocks, but 
initial steps are being taken. The 2023 Fisheries Law provides some initial clarity on the respective fisheries management 
mandates of FGS and FMS, but efforts to promote cooperation between them is needed, to develop the implementing 
regulations, and build capacity to enable authorities and local communities to put measures into practice. The MFBE has 
a broad mandate to provide an enabling environment for the promotion of sustainable development of the fisheries sector 
yet lacks the capacity to execute many of its basic functions. Facilities, equipment and trained staff are lacking for policy 
development and implementation, data collection and analysis, monitoring and surveillance to prevent IUU fishing, and 
promoting safety at sea. Capacity building is also needed for FGS to fully participate in regional cooperation and 
management mechanisms, in particular, the SWIOFC, IOTC and PERSGA. Each of the five FMS has a ministry in charge of 
fisheries and the BRA has a fisheries department, all with emerging capacity (human and technical) that needs to be 
enhanced to support more complex management and planning.  
 
17. 
Reinforcing Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS), including enforcement and prosecution capacity, is a 
key priority to reduce illegal fishing activity. Somali authorities have no patrolling assets, limited surveillance capacity or 
enforcement ability in their maritime waters. In 2017, Somali authorities in the FGS and FMS were equipped with and 
trained on a Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) to track licensed vessels through satellite devices. This enabled the creation 
of a first Fisheries Monitoring Center (FMC) at the MFBE. Access to other sources of information, e.g., Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) was secured for the FMC which was also supported with Technical Assistance in monitoring 
and surveillance. Somalia is also a party to the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Port State 
Measures Agreement (PSMA), the first legally binding international instrument that specifically targets IUU fishing, and 
the 2023 Fisheries Law contains provisions for implementing this agreement. 
 
18. 
In the Somali fisheries sector, gender roles are distinct. Men primarily engage in fishing, international trade of 
high-value species and some domestic distribution, while women engage in processing, local markets, wholesale and 
retail, and restaurants, occupy few decision-making positions and have lower earning potential.20 However, there are a 
few exceptions where women own boats, particularly in the state of Puntland, and women’s groups are emerging in the 
sector with two co-managed fisheries that have women in the executive group. Women are also under-represented in 
pilot fisheries co-management arrangements as well as in public fisheries institutions. In all fisheries ministries, federal 
and states, there are only three women in decision-making roles (one in the FGS and two in the FMS), the proportion of 
women in professional positions is very low, and few women are afforded training opportunities to improve their skills’ 
base. The participation of women in the sector varies among FMS, with women being more involved in economic activities, 
including fisheries, in northern FMS and less in the southern areas. The participation of the youth, i.e., young men and 
women between 15 and 24 years old, in the sector is limited, although there is interest especially for internally displaced 
youth. Lack of access to finance, resources and training, along with cultural pressures, are major barriers to women and 
youth participation, which constrain the full development of the sector. There are also opportunities to significantly scale 
 
20 Alder, 2023. Somali Fisheries Gender Assessment and Strategy
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 13 of 61  
 
up female and youth participation and benefits from handling and processing fish through targeted training, resource 
access and the formation of new cooperatives or associations. 
 
19. 
There is an active private sector, which has invested in fishing, cold storage, fish collection, and processing, but 
currently it mostly only operates in the vicinity of large coastal cities and has yet to capture the full potential of domestic 
and high-value export markets. Spiny lobster has emerging value chains which are profitable enough to cover cold chain 
and collection costs. However other seafood products, caught by local fishers do not have access to or cannot afford 
sufficient cold storage facilities limiting fishers’ access to international, sizeable but less lucrative regional markets and 
growing domestic markets. Expanding city populations are driving increases in domestic demand for seafood, particularly 
in Mogadishu, Garowe and Hargeisa. In rural areas, post-harvest losses are high due to inadequate infrastructure and 
processing systems, limited human capacity, and under-developed value-chains. Since overall food supply remains 
uncertain due to annually variable distribution and levels of rainfall and associated pests such as locusts, fisheries managed 
for sustainability could make a significant contribution to food security. For further development of the private sector, 
proper landing facilities and efficient and clean cold-chain infrastructures are needed to reduce losses and maintain 
quality. In addition, better knowledge about the stock would guide investment in the sector that would be further 
incentivized by management and a sound legal framework.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
20. 
The project contributes to the World Bank’s mission to extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity on a 
livable planet. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 
Federal Republic of Somalia for the Period FY24 – 28 (Report Number 187254-SO), discussed by the Board on February 29, 
2024, in particular, CPF High Level Objectives (HLO) 3 Greater resilience to climatic and other shocks which aims to increase 
the resilience of urban and rural populations in the context of extreme vulnerability to climate change; straining 
infrastructure; persistent drought and floods undermining rural livelihoods and food security. The project also contributes 
to the cross-cutting foundational HLO Macroeconomic stability and governance foundations, in particular objective 0.1 
Increase the effectiveness, transparency, and accountability of institutions, and HLO 1 Inclusive, private sector-led job 
creation and economic growth, in particular Objective 1.2 Increase access to infrastructure, energy, and digital services. 
The project is also aligned with the 2023 SCD Update, supporting in particular HLO 3 Improved Household Resilience to 
Shocks and contributing to foundational HLO 2: Improved Access to and Quality of Services through Better Economic 
Governance; and HLO 5: Enhanced Private Sector for Better Jobs. It also directly contributes to the new World Bank Group 
Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) 2020-2025 pillars of engagement – pillar 1 prevention and pillar 3 
transition out of fragility. The project contributes to the overall engagement of the World Bank in Somalia, with strong 
links to other operations. It fully supports intergovernmental dialogue between the FGS and the FMS and federalism 
building. It complements other investments including the Somali Crisis Recovery Project (SCRP, P173315), The Somalia – 
Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119) which have activities associated to the fisheries sector. The 
project is also supported by the Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project (RCRF) and the latest Development 
Policy Operation (DPO) series which included prior actions and triggers linked to the set-up of an offshore licensing system 
for revenue generation, the adoption of the 2023Fisheries Law and adoption of the first regulations under the new law. 
 
21. 
The project is consistent with the country’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).21 In the latest NDC 
Somalia has committed to 30 percent emission reductions against the business-as-usual scenario by 2030. On adaptation, 
it aims to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience, and reduce vulnerability to climate change through 
mainstreaming climate adaptation into sustainable development. The project contributes to the NDC by promoting energy 
 
21 Somalia. 2021. National Determined Contributions (https://climate-laws.org/documents/somalia-s-updated-ndc_2cbf?id=somalia-s-updated-
ndc_8ef8)
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 14 of 61  
 
efficiency infrastructure, technologies and fishing and fish processing practices as described in the Project’s Climate 
Change co-benefits section (Annex 2) and Paris Alignment Assessment for the project. The project’s operational design 
includes lower-carbon alternatives such as investments in energy-efficient systems and does not hinder transition to 
lower-carbon alternatives or lead to carbon lock-in risk in the future. The project is also consistent with the National 
Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA)22 by supporting the siting and construction of infrastructure to be climate proofed, 
building climate resilience and adaptive fisheries management measures at national, state and local levels, ensuring 
communities consider climate and nature based solutions (NBS) in co-management of marine resources, and working with 
key actors to consider climate in value chain improvement efforts, and supporting research to improve fisheries. In 
addition, the project is aligned with the WBG Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025. The project contributes to UN 
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 by improving fisheries sustainability and access to resources and markets for 
small scale fishers. The project is also aligned with the 2023 Somalia Country Private Sector Diagnostic, in particular its 
Recommendation 3: Improve growth and productivity of selected value chains. 
 
22. 
The project aligns with the World Bank Group’s corporate objectives for Maximizing Finance for Development 
(MFD), including Private Capital Enabling (PCE), by developing an enabling framework to leverage private capital for 
fisheries investments. The Somali private sector has begun investing in the sector, including through the diaspora. 
Investments in processing and exports have faced multiple constraints that inhibit maximizing value. The project’s 
integrated investments in infrastructure, strengthening governance, policy development and capacity-building among 
fishers and value chain MSMEs will address some of the binding constraints that prevent private investment and provide 
further incentives for investment, including for MSMEs. The project will create integrated models of improved fishing 
practices, strengthened value chains and enhanced product quality in selected communities, which is expected to attract 
direct private investment. The proposed infrastructure will be supporting fishing processing, retail and trade activities, 
and stimulate the development of associated private activities e.g., boat/ engine/ fishing gear repair, cold chain equipment 
maintenance, etc. Furthermore, strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, and providing information on the 
status of the stocks will create a healthy environment for informed investment by the private sector. The project will also 
support direct advisory services to the private sector to enhance their business processes and ensure they are empowered 
to operate collectively at a commercial level, and benefit from sector growth. 
 
23. 
The project will contribute to the Somalia National Development Plan (NDP-9) 2020-202423. The Economic 
Development Pillar of this plan aims to build “a more diverse and competitive economy capable of taking advantage of 
emerging regional trade opportunities [as] the best route to broadening growth and mobilizing revenue in the medium to 
long term”. The NDP-9 highlights the opportunities provided by the fisheries sector under this pillar which the project will 
help realize. It will also support thematic pillar 2 (“Promoting Trade and Market Integration”) and thematic pillar 4 
(“Reinforcing Resilience”) of the 2020 Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy Update for FY21–
FY23.  
 
24. 
The project aligns with the World Bank Group Gender Strategy (2024-2030) with a focus on elevating human 
capital, enabling economic opportunities, and engaging women as leaders. The project is also aligned with the Women 
in the Maritime Strategy endorsed by the MFBE and with the Regional Gender Action Plan for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(ESA) (FY24–FY28)24. 
 
22 Federal Republic of Somalia, 2013. National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change 
(https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/som01.pdf) 
23 Somalia National Development Plan 2020 to 2024: The Path to a Just, Stable and Prosperous Somalia (https://mop.gov.so/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/Somali-National-Development-Plan-9-2020-2024.pdf) 
24 Available at https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents- 
reports/documentdetail/099720003042421894/idu1e951cc1f1da4b1450618f67145956c62edae
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 15 of 61  
 
25. 
The project aligns with the Blue Economy for Resilient Africa Program (BE4RAP) announced at the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’s annual Conference of the Parties (COP27). In particular, the project 
contributes to the two pillars related to blue food and blue jobs and support Somalia in managing its fisheries resources 
as public goods. 
 
26. 
The project aligns with and supports the implementation of the Fisheries Master Plan for the Federal Republic 
of Somalia recently developed with support of the FAO and endorsed by the Fisheries Management and Development 
Council (FMDC) in February 2024. The Fisheries Masterplan is an overall strategy that aims to address urgent needs, 
identify priorities and build a business case for intervention. The plan specifically provides guidance on the policy and legal 
framework, fisheries management, including stock assessment, fisheries value-chains, supporting infrastructure as well as 
hygiene standards and certification, fisheries compliance and Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS), blue economy 
development and overall capacity building. The project will also support the implementation of FAO’s Code of Conduct for 
Responsible Fisheries25 and the Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries in the Context of Food 
Security and Poverty Eradication26.  
 
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
PDO Statement 
27. 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity of targeted communities and authorities to 
benefit from and effectively manage selected fisheries. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
a) Climate informed fisheries management plans formulated, and implemented (Number) 
b) FMDC meetings (Number) 
c) Fishing communities with improved capacity to benefit (Number) 
d) Project beneficiaries (direct) (Number)  
e) Reduction in food loss and waste in targeted value chains (Percentage)  
 
B. Project Components 
 
28. 
The project implementation area will include the Internal Waters (IW), Territorial Sea (TS) and Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) of the Federal Republic of Somalia, including the following specifications: no project activities, 
including activities associated to i) Monitoring, Control and Surveillance and the implementation of the MCS strategy, ii) 
fisheries data collection, or iii) fisheries improvement or development activities, will be conducted in the maritime area 
south of the parallel 1° 39’ 44.0” South and in the maritime area northwest of the line defined by the list of coordinates 
in Annex 4. Based on previous collaboration agreements, the project will include activities and investment in all five FMS 
as well as in Mogadishu. No activities are foreseen in Somaliland at this stage, although this could be discussed in the 
future. 
 
25FAO, 1995. Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (https://www.fao.org/fishery/en/code) 
26 FAO, 2015. Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries in the Context of Food Security and Poverty Eradication 
(http://www.fao.org/3/i4356en/i4356en.pdf)
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 16 of 61  
 
29. 
To maximize impact and benefits, all community activities-under Component 1 and Component 2 will be 
delivered as a package in selected communities. Through preparatory activities, two potential sites per FMS have been 
identified for investment as well as Mogadishu.27 For each of the selected communities, support, including planning, 
investment and associated capacity building, etc. will be provided on, (a) fisheries infrastructure development and 
operationalization, (b) value-chain improvements, and (c) co-management of fisheries resources, including participatory 
MCS. National systems such as i) data collection, and ii) fisheries and vessels registration and licensing will also be piloted 
and introduced first in these selected communities. 
 
30. 
Component 1. Increasing the Capacity of Dependent Communities to Benefit from Sustainable Marine Fisheries 
(US$27,085,000 IDA equivalent). This component aims to establish or improve small-scale fisheries sustainable 
infrastructure that is climate resilient,28 and financially viable and value chains with primary beneficiaries being fishers, 
fish workers and their communities including cooperatives and MSMEs.29 
 
31. 
Sub-component 1.1 Climate-resilient fisheries infrastructure (US$22,575,000 IDA equivalent). This sub-component 
will support identification, planning and construction of climate-resilient30 and gender-responsive small-scale fishing 
infrastructure at a minimum of 12 sites in consultation with selected communities and stakeholders. These investments 
are designed to enable private sector investments in catching, processing and transporting seafood as well as associated 
activities, e.g., boat building, repair, and equipment maintenance (engines, fishing gear, cold-chain equipment, etc.). They 
will be confirmed before grant effectiveness and preparatory studies will start during the early stage of the project. 
Investments have been identified and confirmed during preparation for Jazeera in South-West and Warsheik in 
Hirshabelle. For these two sites, preparatory studies will start before effectiveness. Identification and planning support 
will include the preparation of feasibility studies, technical designs that consider climate change and the needs of men, 
women and youth, environment and social instruments and infrastructure management/business plans. Plans will define 
management options for the infrastructure, e.g., community managed, PPPs, etc. Possible infrastructure includes cold 
stores fitted with energy-efficient power supply, ice-production facilities, storage facilities, as well as processing facilities, 
all of which are critical for handling fish catch in increasingly warmer climate; jetties to protect navigation channels from 
coastal flooding; and local markets (which reduce fish loss and waste compared to exports) to lay the foundation for 
private sector investment. This sub-component will also support capacity building to manage, operate and maintain the 
infrastructure considering climate change, including financial sustainability to manage increasing operating costs under 
projected warmer air temperature. For Mogadishu, given the limited land availability in the two traditional landing sites, 
Hamarweyne and Lido, a new investment in another area of the city will imply a drastic change for fishers, processors and 
consumers. The project will therefore support a medium and long-term vision and investment plan that takes climate 
change considerations, including feasibility studies, socio-economic and environmental assessments, with potentially 
preliminary infrastructure. 
 
32. 
Sub-component 1.2. Improving fishing, handling, processing, and marketing techniques to enhance quality and 
value-addition (US$4,510,000 IDA equivalent). This sub-component will support screening and assessment of various value 
chains associated with targeted communities and the formulation of climate-resilient improvement plans for up to six fish 
value chains that support fisheries at each selected infrastructure sites. Value chain improvement plans take climate 
change considerations to improve and diversify fish supply, species, and products to adapt to changing fisheries due to 
 
27 Jubbaland: Calanley and Kibora sites in Kismayo; Southwest: Jazeera, Barawaa and Merca; Hirshabelle: Ceel Macaan and Warsheik; Galmudug: 
Ceel Hur and Hobyo; Puntland: Garaad and Bargaal as well as Mogadishu in Banadir. 
28 Climate resilience infrastructure considers design, construction and materials that reduce the impacts of climate change such as locating above 1 
in a 100-year tidal surge, planting vegetation to reduce solar radiation, insulation, cold stores running on solar energy and other such measures. 
29 Unless otherwise indicated, activities in all components aim to be gender-responsive to address the gender barriers described in the I.B Sector 
Context section. Further details of gender efforts are provided below in IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY, Part C. 
30 Climate resilience infrastructure considers design, construction and materials that reduce the impacts of climate change.
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 17 of 61  
 
climate change; financial management in preparation for disruptions caused by climate impact; and investment plans for 
climate-smart equipment and infrastructure. The development of these plans will start and aim to be completed within 
the first half of the project. This will be done in consultation with beneficiary communities and stakeholders, so the 
benefits are economically and socially sustainable and climate resilient. Support for implementation of value chain 
improvement plans include awareness raising, capacity building, training, and advice (technical including climate change 
impacts and business) based on needs assessments, including financial skills to address gender barriers and to realize new 
business opportunities. The sub-component will also support strengthening or establishing sectoral organizations, 
including cooperatives and associations, and improving labor conditions and promoting women into leadership roles 
through capacity building and mentoring. For selected sites, beneficiaries (fishers, processors, and related businesses) will 
be supported to transition to climate-informed fishing and processing practices including safety-at-sea,31 new low-carbon 
technologies and equipment with awareness raising, training, and provision of advisory services as well as organizing 
communities. This subcomponent aims to reduce fish losses from weather-related impacts, improve product quality and 
develop new products and improve access to appropriate equipment and training. Additional support will be provided for 
promoting and marketing seafood products based on value chain improvement plans and market studies, and in 
consultation with potential beneficiaries.  
 
33. 
Component 2: Strengthening Marine Fisheries Governance and Management (US$15,060,000 IDA equivalent, 
US$5 million PROBLUE). This component will set the foundation for long-term climate resilient Somali fisheries that are 
managed for sustainability by investing in fisheries governance as laid out in the 2023 Fisheries Law. 32.The main 
beneficiaries will be FGS and FMS fisheries ministries, fishers, fish workers and their communities, as well as investors. 
 
34. 
Sub-component 2.1: Laying a foundation for effective, transparent, and equitable fisheries resource governance 
and management (US$11,020,000 IDA equivalent; US$3,720,000 PROBLUE). This sub-component will support marine 
fisheries governance and management by providing technical assistance and operational support to the Fisheries 
Management Development Council (FMDC) and its meetings, as well as legal and technical support to FGS and FMS 
fisheries ministries to develop harmonized legal and regulatory frameworks to implement the 2023 Fisheries law and 
support sustainable development of the sector, including through private sector investment. In the early stage of 
implementation, the project will support the finalization and adoption of the Fisheries Policy, revisions of the FMS Fisheries 
Law for harmonization with the 2023 Fisheries Law33, adoption of regulations on licensing and MCS by FMS, on inspection 
and quality assurance. The project will further support the adoption of complementary regulations according to Article 
158 of the 2023 Fisheries law. Building on these initial advances, this sub-component will produce and support initial 
implementation of ecosystem-based and climate-informed management plans, in a fully consultative and participatory 
manner, for selected fisheries shared among FMS and the FGS. The project is creating a foundation for sustainable fisheries 
management, enhancing robust fish stock and long-term resilience of marine ecosystems and addressing gender barriers 
such as access to resources and training, so that future interventions in the sector can be transformative. The project’s 
stakeholder engagement plan and the terms of reference for the preparation and implementation of management plans 
will ensure the active participation of women. A national system for fisher and vessel registration will be established to 
help formalize and enable transparency and investment in the sector. Initial investments will be made to build capacity 
and make FGS and FMS ministry staff and offices functional. Other public and research institutions will also be 
strengthened, including support for effective enforcement and prosecution of illegal fishing operations which can 
significantly compromise the sustainable fisheries management; generation and data analysis for decision-making, and 
improvement of food safety standards to contribute to domestic food security and exports. The component will also pilot 
 
31 Safety-at-sea is a climate adaptation measure against extreme weather events. See International Fund for Agricultural Development. 2015. How 
to do Fisheries, aquaculture and climate change: Guidance for adaptation and mitigation. 
32 https://mfbe.gov.so/laws/  
33 The 2023 Fisheries Law was adopted at the federal level and FMS fisheries laws need to be revised to be consistent and aligned with it.
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 18 of 61  
 
the establishment of formal co-management systems 34 in 12 selected communities benefiting from Component 1 
investments, while accounting for capacity constraints and cultural and social factors, including development and 
implementation of co-management agreements with consideration of potential climate impacts. These activities will build 
the capacity of men, women and youth in targeted fishing communities, to participate in managing the resources they 
depend on. Applied research to improve existing or identify potential new fisheries will also be supported. 
 
35. 
Sub-component 2.2: Developing a comprehensive Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) system to fight IUU 
fishing in Somali waters (US$3,740,000 IDA equivalent). 35 As described earlier, the challenges posed by climate change to 
Somali fisheries require urgent reduction in overfishing and excess capacity to maintain robust fish stock and build long-
term resilience of marine ecosystems. This sub-component will support the implementation of the MCS strategy recently 
developed with assistance from the WBG to promote sustainable fisheries management, including investments in: i) the 
development and implementation of a National Plan of Action to prevent, deter and eliminate Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated Fishing (NPOA-IUU) with a focus on I – Illegal and also U - Unregulated, ii) the upgrading and decentralization 
of the Fisheries Monitoring Center with equipment, services, technical assistance, standard operating procedures (e.g. 
SOPs for satellite monitoring such as Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) and Automatic Identification System (AIS)), iii) 
boarding and inspection of vessels, iv) fisheries observers, v) evidences chain-of-custody, etc. and, vi) associated training).  
This sub-component will also finance and build capacity for offshore patrols at sea in the EEZ by the FGS, through the 
chartering of patrol vessels, and capacity building in inspection, and risk assessment. For coastal surveillance in territorial 
waters by FMS, the sub-component will support with energy efficient equipment such as 4-stroke versus 2-stroke engines, 
including small patrol boats, to be used exclusively for fisheries enforcement. While the project will support and provide 
assets, equipment and training exclusively to the ministries in charge of fisheries, collaboration may be sought with the 
maritime polices who are benefiting from training by partners (e.g., United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, European 
Union Capacity Building Mission in Somalia) on at-sea patrolling, boarding procedures, operating and maintenance of 
patrol vessels, given that these skills are limited within fisheries ministries. Any patrol, onshore, coastal or offshore, at sea, 
on land or in air, will be led by fisheries authorities. 
 
36. 
Sub-component 2.3: Fisheries Statistics and Stock Assessments (US$1,280,000 PROBLUE). The project will support 
research on the likely impacts that climate change may have on fish populations and marine ecosystems and provide 
technical assistance to enable adaptive management of fishery resources over the next five to twenty years.36 This sub-
component will support the development and deployment of, and begin to institutionalize, tools and systems to generate, 
analyze and disseminate information essential for effective fisheries management. In particular, this subcomponent will 
support: i) the development and implementation of a national harmonized and decentralized system for the collection of 
fish catch statistics and related data by FGS and FMS ministries, universities and community members, ii) technical 
assistance and capacity-building for both men and women, to determine the state of selected stocks and provide 
management advice, iii) the design of an integrated fisheries’ information management system, accessible by relevant 
FGS and FMS agencies, to collect, store and analyze fisheries related data to inform the management of targeted fish 
stocks. The system will build on modern technologies (e.g., mobile technologies) while remaining tailored to the needs 
and capacity in Somalia.   
 
37. 
Sub-component 2.4: Strategic studies on fisheries development and blue economy (US$300,000 IDA equivalent). 
This subcomponent will support a set of analytical and strategic studies for long term development of the fisheries sector 
 
34 A process of management in which government shares power with resource users, with each given specific rights and responsibilities relating to 
information and decision-making (OECD (1996), Synthesis report for the study on the economic aspects of the management of marine living 
resources. AGR/FI(96)12) 
35 To cease IUU fishing is a climate adaptation measure included in Somalia’s National Adaptation Programme of Action on Climate Change (2013). 
36 Research for improved fisheries management is identified among the adaptation options for Somalia in its NAPA (2013).
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 19 of 61  
 
in the changing fisheries environment and the broader blue economy in Somalia, the precise scope of which will be 
determined during the early stages of the project. 
 
38. 
The PROBLUE Multi Donor Trust Fund will provide a US$5 million grant to the project specifically for activities 
under Component 2, specifically 2.1 and 2.3 as described above, to be implemented by the Ministries in charge of fisheries 
in the FGS and FMS. These activities will include a) meetings of the FMDC, b) the strengthening of all policy, legal and 
regulatory frameworks at FGS and FMS levels, c) the development and initiation of implementation of all management 
plans, 4) the development of registrations systems for fishers, vessels and licenses, d) development and implementation 
of strategies and reforms for gender empowerment, e) the development and implementation of a Fisheries Information 
Management System and f) the determination of the status of priority stocks. 
 
39. 
Component 3:  Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation (US$7,855,000 IDA equivalent) This component 
will ensure effective implementation of project activities and fiduciary management and effective monitoring and 
evaluation, and conformity with the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). It will provide equipment, 
technical assistance, training, and incremental operating costs to the MFBE to strengthen its capacity to manage, 
implement, and monitor project activities. Specifically, support will include staffing and operation of a Project 
Management Unit (PMU) within the MFBE of the FGS, with representatives from the FMS ministries of fisheries; 
establishing adequate financial and procurement management systems; implementing an overall communication plan 
and grievance redress mechanism; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); preparing and implementing specific environmental 
and social instruments as per the ESF; coordinating with other ministries (e.g. Ministry of Environment and Energy) and 
the private sector; evaluation studies; and sharing knowledge and experience gained through the project related to 
fisheries management at the regional level. 
Table 1.Project budget 
Project Components 
IDA 
(US$) 
PROBLUE 
(US$) 
Total 
Component 1. Increasing the Capacity of Dependent Communities to Benefit from Sustainable Marine Fisheries 
1.1 Climate-resilient fisheries infrastructure 
22,575,000 
0 
22,575,000 
1.2 Improving fishing, handling, processing, and marketing techniques to enhance quality 
and value-addition 
4,510,000 
0 
4,510,000 
Total component budget 
27,085,000 
0 
27,085,000 
Component 2. Strengthening Marine Fisheries Governance and Management 
2.1 Laying a foundation for effective, transparent, and equitable fisheries resource 
governance and management 
11,020,000 
3,720,000 
14,740,000 
2.2 Developing a comprehensive Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS)37 system to 
fight IUU fishing in Somali waters 
3,740,000 
0 
3,740,000 
2.3 Fisheries Statistics and Stock Assessments 
0 
1,280,000 
1,280,000 
2.4 Strategic studies on fisheries development and blue economy 
300,000 
0 
300,000 
Total component budget 
15,060,000  5,000,000 
20,060,000 
Component 3. Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation 
Project management 
7,855,000  
0 
7,855,000 
Total component budget 
7,855,000  
0 
7,855,000 
TOTAL 
50,000,000  5,000,000 
55,000,000 
 
 
37 MCS to cease IUU fishing is a climate adaptation measure to promote sustainable fisheries management (IFAD, op. cit. P.14.) and included in 
Somalia’s NAPA (2013).
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 20 of 61  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
40. 
The project activities are expected to directly benefit people (estimated 165,000) in the 12 targeted 
communities along the Somali coast, in particular fishing and other associated households, as well as staff from national 
authorities. For these targeted communities, fishing is essential to their livelihoods. These communities are fragile, located 
in areas with particularly high food insecurity and are vulnerable. Their livelihoods are highly dependent on natural 
resources, in particular fisheries’ stocks and the ecosystems that support them. Within these communities, as well as in 
the rest of the country, the project is also expected to benefit businesses, in particular informal workers and MSMEs 
involved in the fisheries’ value chains. The private sector will benefit from improved fishing and processing skills, as well 
as from enhanced cold-chains, which will reduce post-harvest losses and improve the products’ quality. It will also benefit 
from improved fisheries management, supporting the rebuilding of stocks as well as their sustainability and guiding their 
investments. Finally, the project will also directly benefit public institutions involved in fisheries’ management, in 
particular ministries of fisheries in the FGS and FMS (six in total) and the fisheries department of the BRA, as well as other 
ministries and institutions involved in the MCS. 
 
41. 
The project aims to improve women’s productivity and earnings in the fisheries sector, as well as their role in 
local decision making and institutional leadership. To improve women’s earnings, training and technical advice will be 
provided at convenient time and locations, and through other culturally appropriate modalities, to support the 
participation of women and women-owned businesses in value chain improvement activities under Subcomponent 1.2. 
In addition, the subcomponent will also provide training and mentorship to promote women’s leadership in new and 
existing sectoral organizations (including cooperatives and business associations) and engage these organizations directly 
in the planning of value chain improvement activities. The impact of these measures will be measured through the 
indicator: Share of targeted MSMEs benefitted from implementation of value chain improvement plans of which owned/led 
by women (target 20 percent). 
 
42. 
Subcomponent 2.1 will establish a target for women’s participation in fishery co-management arrangements, 
including in executive bodies to improve women’s decision making and leadership in the sector. This subcomponent will 
also support eligible women to participate in and lead fisheries’ co-management arrangements and build capacity for 
women in leadership roles in relevant FGS and FMS fisheries ministries. The impact of these measures will be measured 
through the indicators: Number of-management arrangements with at-least 10 percent women participation (target from 
0 to 8); and Number of co-management arrangements of which at least one woman in an executive position in its 
governance body (target from 3 to 8). In addition, the indicator: Share of direct beneficiaries that are women (target 30 
percent) will be used to measure the beneficial impact of the project on women. 
 
D. Results Chain 
43. 
The Theory of Change is that if activities produce fit-for-purpose infrastructure, establish the effective 
management of fisheries, and strengthen fish value chains, while considering climate change impacts and gender 
aspects, in an intentionally linked and synergistic manner around targeted fishing communities, the project will have 
laid the foundation for sustainable fisheries and through a climate resilient perspective. These interlinked activities 
(Figure 1) will in turn enhance livelihoods, food security and sustainable economic development nationally and in the 
targeted coastal communities in Somalia. The three areas of work will also seek to create opportunities for marginalized 
groups such as women, to participate and benefit from this development in the private and public dimensions of the 
fisheries sector.
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 21 of 61  
 
Figure 1. Project’s Theory of Change 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
44. 
The project builds on previous success in the fisheries sector supported by the World Bank and other donors. 
The Interim Revenue Sharing Agreement signed in 2018 by the FGS and FMS to license foreign vessels fishing in Somali 
waters and share the revenue represents a positive step in governance that extends beyond fisheries. The project is 
specifically designed to build on this past success to begin to institutionalize and then strengthen federal fisheries 
governance across all FMS. Fisheries also represent a sector with significant economic growth potential if fish stocks are 
managed sustainably and fish are landed in Somalia to expand nutrition, food security and value chains. The World Bank
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 22 of 61  
 
is well positioned to invest in the institutional capacity needed for effective resource management at FGS and FMS levels 
as it invests in value-enhancing infrastructure and value chains in targeted communities across the country. The World 
Bank has also supported the development and adoption of a new Fisheries Law at the Federal level, including through the 
latest DPO Series. 
 
45. 
The World Bank has been at the forefront of supporting the management and development of the fisheries 
sector in the Southwest Indian Ocean region. Since over 15 years, the World Bank invested in fisheries in the region 
through the implementation of several regional and national operations, (SWIOFish regional program in Comoros, 
Madagascar, Tanzania, Mozambique, Seychelles, Maldives; KEMFSED (Kenya); SFISH (Yemen); MozBio and MozNorte 
(Mozambique). In Somalia, the World Bank has supported the sector since 2017 and coordinating with other donors 
involved in fisheries. The World Bank’s convening power is a critical asset to foster cooperation between various levels of 
governments, across sectors and donors. 
 
46. 
The project will support other fisheries intervention in Somalia and in the region. The project will complement 
the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (SCRP, P173315) activities through further support to SCRP fisheries activities to 
promote the sustainability of the investments and scale-up. Proactive coordination will also be promoted with the Horn 
of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119) and also the Transforming Fisheries Sector Management in South-
West Indian Ocean Region and Maldives Project (TRANSFORM, P179242), in particular SWIOFC regional activities. The 
Global Program for the Blue Economy Multi-Donor Trust Fund (PROBLUE), administered by the World Bank, supported 
background analytical work that informed the project design and will co-finance its implementation. In particular, 
PROBLUE supported i) the preparation of a national Monitoring Control and Surveillance (MCS) Strategy which will be 
implemented through the project, ii) the identification of site for infrastructure development (on-going), iii) a review of 
fisheries governance and management arrangement in federal settings for presentation at the first meeting of the FMDC. 
More work is under preparation on the design of data collection system, governance arrangements for priority fisheries 
and on value-chains. This co-financing enables faster disbursement under the project. This project has been developed 
with extensive consultation with other development partners, including the EU, USAID, other bilateral aid agencies, the 
FAO, and a small number of NGOs, all members of the Fisheries Development Working Group with activities associated to 
fisheries in the country.  
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
47. 
The design of the project draws on lessons learned from recently closed and ongoing fisheries projects as well 
as Somali projects with infrastructure elements. The first key lesson in developing the fisheries sector requires interlinked 
investments in management, infrastructure and value chains for the same fisheries and locations. Linking these 
interventions can create synergies and optimize impacts instead of focusing primarily on management. The project will: 
a) strengthen management to send a positive signal to potential investors; b) strengthen MSMEs' economic and social 
performance; and c) establish or rehabilitate fishing infrastructure. The second is harnessing fisheries’ growth potential 
and setting the sector on a sustainable pathway is a long-term process. For example, in Mozambique and in Pacific Islands 
Countries, the World Bank is investing in the sector through several consecutive regional or regional operations. The 
project focuses on setting the foundation for this process with stakeholder dialogue and capacity-building, recognizing the 
key role of fishing communities, and strengthening of FGS and FMS ministries. The third is compliance with management 
measures is more likely if ownership of these measures is ensured from the beneficiary communities and the private 
sector by involving them throughout the development of management plans and through co-management. This was 
shown in several World Bank projects supporting co-management, like the countries of the Western Africa Regional 
Fisheries Program (WARFP, P106063) and the South-West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Program 
(SWIOFish, P132123, P153370, P155642).
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 23 of 61  
 
48. 
The project also draws from the operational experience of the World Bank and its partners with previous 
investment projects in the country.38 Key lessons include: (i) project design and implementation arrangements must be 
kept simple, transparent and use existing modalities where possible. Implementation is simple with a PMU in Mogadishu 
and small project implementation unit in each state with fiduciary responsibility at the FGS level, similarly to the SCRP and 
the Somalia Education for Human Capital Development project, and uses the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) 
model for financial management and procurement, and Capacity Injection Manual (CIM) guidelines, similarly to all projects 
in Somalia; and (ii) engage FMS early to ensure implementation and flexibility for carrying out eventual changes, like the 
Biyoole and Barwaaqo projects. The FMS were engaged early to help ensure project activities and interventions have the 
needed buy-in and participation; and (iii) projects should ensure that preparation is sufficiently advanced to allow the 
borrower to start a substantial part of the project immediately after approval. The project has secured a project 
preparation advance (PPA) to prioritize preparation for infrastructure activities since July 2023. The PPA supported the 
MFBE for the preparation period of the project, as well as its readiness for implementation. In particular, the PPA is helping 
in establishing and equipping the PMU, kick-starting FGS-FMS coordination, and funding baseline surveys.  
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
49. 
All project interventions will be carried out in a manner consistent with the Federal Fisheries Law of Somalia.  
The project will be implemented by the MFBE of the FGS, with the ministries of fisheries in the FMS and in consultation 
with beneficiary communities. 
 
50. 
A project management unit (PMU) will be established within the MFBE. This unit will be responsible for overall 
project implementation and coordination with stakeholders, including procurement and contract management, 
environmental and social issues, monitoring and evaluation, overall quality control of project activities and execution, and 
enabling effective communication among stakeholder agencies and beneficiary communities. The PMU will be led by a 
national project coordinator (NPC) who will report directly to the Minister of Fisheries and Blue Economy (or senior officer 
designated by the Minister), and the unit will include technical and administrative specialists including environmental, 
social development, procurement financial management, monitoring and evaluation and communication specialists. 
Throughout the project implementation, the PMU may also rely on highly specialized technical assistance and expertise 
on various technical or administrative aspects of the project to fill knowledge gaps and build capacity within the unit and 
the various ministries. The PMU Specialists will work closely with and support the technical, and administrative needs of 
FMS and targeted local fishing communities. Specialists will report to the PMU but within work plans agreed to with the 
relevant FMS fisheries ministries.  
 
51. 
Project implementation units (PIU) will be established within each FMS Ministry of Fisheries and be responsible 
for the coordination and implementation of project activities in fishing communities within each of the participating 
FMS. The PIUs will be composed of a State Project Coordinator (SPC) and administrative staff as deemed necessary. The 
SPC will report to the State Minister of Fisheries (or other senior officer designated by the respective FMS minister of 
fisheries). 
 
 
38 Key projects include the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343), Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119), Water for Agro-
Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P167826) and Somali Electricity Access Project (P165497)
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 24 of 61  
 
52. 
The Technical Working Group of the Director General (DG-TWG), composed of all Director General of fisheries 
from the FMGS and FMS will serve as Project Steering Committee (PSC) for the project. With two meetings a year, the 
PSC will review project progress and endorse Annual Work Plan and Budget and Procurement Plan. 
 
53. 
The project will support other institutions and government agencies that establish formal partnerships, through 
memoranda of understandings, with the MFBE. This support will facilitate implementation of project activities that fall 
outside of the core competencies of the MFBE. These include food safety, enforcement, scientific research, and education 
and may include such entities as the Food Safety and Quality Control Agency, Police and Navy, Research Institutes and 
Universities respectively. 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
54. 
The project will support regular monitoring, evaluation, learning and adaptation of project progress under 
Component 3. Overall responsibility for M&E will be with the MFBE and the PMU. Project progress will be measured 
against the Results Framework, results indicators, and M&E arrangement across all sub-components. The PMU will hire 
an M&E specialist as a core part of the unit to manage monitoring, reporting and evaluation planned under the Project. 
The M&E officer will work closely with the FMS implementation teams to support monitoring and reporting of project 
outputs and outcomes. Through its Results Framework, the project will also report on PROBLUE results indicators as 
described in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. An M&E manual, part of the Project Implementation Manual, will detail 
the approach and tools, and clarify the M&E roles and responsibilities. The project will set aside funds for the 
implementation of the M&E framework, including regular field surveys. 
 
55. 
World Bank implementation support missions will be conducted at least every six months. These missions will 
include reviewing progress in strengthening institutional capacity, financial viability, and technical reviews. Where 
possible, site visits will be made to provide effective monitoring of progress. Specific supervision is planned for the 
investment in coastal location, which could include third-party monitoring and/or use of the Geo-Enabling initiative for 
Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) given the inaccessibility of some of the selected locations, in particular due to security 
concerns. The project will set aside funds for the implementation of the M&E framework, including regular field surveys.  
 
56. 
Project M&E will be instrumental in generating scientific information for evidence-based decision making and 
strengthening the fisheries sector statistics in the country. During the first year of implementation, a fisheries data 
collection system will be developed to capture information on catches, effort, and other socio-economic information. This 
will be used to measure stock status and fishing efforts for selected fisheries for strengthened fisheries management 
decision making and to inform project activities for fisheries infrastructure and value chains. Stock assessments for priority 
species will be carried out twice during project implementation. This will build technical capacity in MFBE and FMS 
agencies for the broader application of scientific methodologies in the country’s fisheries management systems. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
57. 
Somalia’s commitment to the project is reflected in its recognition of the importance of its fishery resources to 
the country’s sustainable development; both as a source of public revenue and as a basis for economic growth, jobs 
and food security. The country’s commitment is also reflected in efforts to modernize its fisheries legislation and attract 
private investments in the fishing sector. Interventions around fisheries governance, based on the ecosystem approach, 
including monitoring, control and surveillance will contribute significantly to the sustainable management of Somalia’s 
fish resources. Fisheries infrastructure including value chain improvements will be based on comprehensive analytical 
work to ensure no investment results in unintended increases in fishing effort, catches or impacts on ecosystems. The
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 25 of 61  
 
project will strengthen all units responsible for post-construction operation and maintenance at all levels including 
financial sustainability after the project ends.  
 
58. 
The project will contribute to public sector financial sustainability by improving the effectiveness of the public 
institutions and by increasing private sector rents. In the long term, public finances will benefit from resources’ rents and 
through new and more profitable enterprises entering or improving their economic performance. The project will enhance 
the capacity of relevant government institutions, targeted beneficiaries, and the private sector to take full ownership of 
the project’s interventions and results. 
 
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
59. 
The project will bring several non- quantifiable benefits, first the 2023 Fisheries Law passed that ensures zoning 
of fishing areas will reduce the incidence of IUU fishing, in particular by industrial trawlers which results in unfair 
competition with small-scale fisher folks and destruction of the fishery habitat. Secondly, preliminary investment in the 
Mogadishu fishing port through carrying out pre-feasibility and social, environmental, and economic assessments provides 
an opportunity for future investors and partners, added to the fact that the country has a long coastline of approximately 
3,300 km, that presents a good opportunity to increase business and investment in the sector. Thirdly, the gender 
responsive support to small-scale fishing entrepreneur through the development of infrastructure is expected to empower 
women entrepreneurs which will in turn reduce the high gender inequality in the country (0.776- a score near 1 means 
high inequality).  
 
60. 
Investing in the fisheries sector has a positive net present value of US$184.3 million and internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 82 percent after 10 years when income from licenses and value from fish exports are included. Sensitivity 
analysis further shows that an increase in resource rent from 3.7 percent to 10 percent will increase the net present value 
to US$519.5 million, given a discount rate of 15 percent. The benefits associated with the project can largely be categorized 
as: (a) income from licenses, (b) increase in the value fish exports, (c) attraction of private investments to the fisheries 
sub-sector, and (d) improvement in the livelihoods of the Somalia fishers, fish workers and their communities, as well as 
entrepreneurs. Due to lack of data, only benefits from (a) and (b) are included. 
 
61. 
 Activities proposed under the project are typically financed by governments. Public investment in small-scale 
fisheries community infrastructure and value-chain improvement will support the enabling environment for private sector 
investment. Additional interventions in coordination between FGS and FMS, institutional, policy, legal and regulatory 
reforms, determination of the status of the stocks and improved management of these public goods can only happen 
through government expenditures. 
 
62. 
The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. 
 
63. 
Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks: the project is consistent with the country’s strategies on climate 
change and does not hinder the achievement of national climate goals and commitments outlined in strategic documents. 
It is aligned with the Paris Agreement’s mitigation goals. Activities in the two main components supports mitigation 
measures. Most project activities are considered to have a negligible impact on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and are 
not likely to have an adverse effect on the country’s GHG emission targets. Some activities have mitigation potential, 
including climate smart infrastructure and equipment for the fishing sector and across value chains, fuel reducing fishing
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 26 of 61  
 
practices and reduction in food loss and waste. While the project supports the construction or renovation of physical 
infrastructure, these physical interventions will not pose major, irreversible impacts on GHG emissions, given their nature 
and relatively small scale. For infrastructures, which currently do not have lower-carbon alternatives suitable for Somalia’s 
situation, but are necessary to achieve the PDO, the project design incorporates some decarbonization pathways such as 
using solar energy where possible and low or zero carbon practices and equipment where available which reduce the 
residual risk to low risk. Governance and management of fisheries supported by the project also offers opportunities for 
carbon sequestration through improved stocks status and improved fishing practices. 
 
64. 
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks: The project is supporting adaptation and resilience-enhancing 
measures across the fishing sector, with a particular focus on strengthening small-scale fishing communities’ capacity to 
manage marine resources and develop value chains sustainably given the impending climate change impacts, with 
additional attention to gender. The adaptive capacity in coastal fishing communities vulnerable to climate impacts will be 
strengthened through supporting climate resilient management for sustainable fisheries, which includes co-management 
activities that will contribute to climate resilience and disaster risk planning with a focus on gender. Capacity building to 
strengthen value chains will include planning for the impacts of climate change on fish supplies and processing operations. 
Other activities for resilience building include improving fishers’ disaster preparedness that considers gender needs, 
safety-at-sea measures for fishers, and the collection of data and information to better inform decision making. The 
project will support the design and construction of climate-resilient fishing infrastructure and the improvement of climate 
resilient fish value chains in coastal fishing communities, both activities have capacity building which will include improving 
climate change awareness, adaptation, and disaster risk planning. 
 
B. Fiduciary 
(i) Financial Management 
 
65. 
The Financial Management (FM) arrangements will be mainstreamed into the country’s established FM policies 
and systems in line with arrangements for Use of Country Systems (UCS). The project’s financial transactions will be 
processed through the Somali Financial Management Information System (SFMIS) which will also be used to generate 
periodic financial reports. Project internal control arrangements will be based on the government’s Comprehensive 
Operations and Accounting Procedures Manual (COAPM). To mitigate the risk of potential diversion of funds and 
unsupported payments, contractors, consultants and suppliers will be paid through the direct payment method and 
payment requests will be supported by adequate documentation including evidence of outputs and deliverables. In 
addition, proper due diligence will be conducted in the recruitment of consultants in line with regular procurement 
procedures to mitigate the risk of recruitment irregularities and double dipping. The project FM capacity will be supported 
by the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) in the Office of the Accountant General to enhance segregation of 
functions and build capacity for full Use of Country Systems. External audit of the project will be conducted by the Office 
of the Auditor General with necessary capacity support from an external audit agent. The main fiduciary risks relate to 
challenges of monitoring and supervision of planned construction of base infrastructure (including processing facilities 
and technologies) under component 1 to enable private sector investment in facilities (e.g., cold store and ice plant).  This 
will be mitigated by the recruitment of a firm to supervise the construction of the project infrastructure. Further support 
is planned for supervision of the identified works and capacity building for operating and maintaining the infrastructure 
including financial sustainability. The project will also consider the use of remote monitoring and supervision mechanisms 
including the Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) tool to monitor project activities and outputs 
in hard-to-reach areas and Kobo toolbox for data collection, integration and analysis. GEMS can be used as a platform to 
combine all relevant data, for remote supervision, real-time environment and social monitoring, and portfolio mapping 
for coordination across projects and partners.
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 27 of 61  
 
66. 
The project will follow the Statement of Expenditure (SoE) method of disbursements. A designated account (DA) 
will be opened for the project at the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) where funds from the World Bank will be deposited 
and payments made for project activities. An initial advance will be made to the DA based on submission of withdrawal 
application to the World Bank accompanied by a six-month cash forecast. Subsequent disbursements to the DA will be 
based on submission of withdrawal application accompanied by a Statement of Expenditures (SoE) incurred. As much as 
possible, consultants, contractors and suppliers will be paid through the direct payment method to mitigate the fiduciary 
risks associated with holding funds in the DA.  
 
(ii)  Procurement 
 
67. 
Procurement Procedures: Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement 
Regulations for IPF Borrowers for Procurement of Goods, Works, Non-consulting Services and Consulting Services dated 
July 2016 and revised in September 2023 (Procurement Regulations); the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud 
and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, revised July 1, 2016; and the provisions 
stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  
 
68. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and the Procurement Plan (PP). The Ministry of Fisheries 
and Blue Economy (MFBE) has prepared a PPSD and PP for the first 18 months with a focus on key procurement activities 
to select the optimum fit-for-purpose method and market approach. The PPSD includes a summary on procurement risk, 
mitigation measures, an action plan, and procurement implementation support and supervision plan. The PPSD along with 
the initial PP for the first 18 months have been finalized as per the requirement of Procurement Regulations. The PP will 
be updated in agreement with the World Bank, at least annually, or as required, to reflect changes in the procurement 
arrangement which might be required due to a change in requirements, market conditions, procurement environment 
and so on. 
 
69. 
Procurement Implementation Arrangements. Implementation will be by the MFBE of the Federal Government of 
Somalia which will serve as the main implementing agency at the Federal level. The Ministry has limited procurement 
capacity and previous experience with World Bank financed operations. To mitigate the risk, a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) will be established and housed within MFBE. PMU capacity will be strengthened by recruiting consultants including 
a Project Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, Procurement Specialist among others. The PMU will be 
responsible for project implementation including procurement implementation, management, and oversight. In the 
proposed arrangements, the Project Procurement Specialist in the PMU will work alongside the relevant government staff 
in the MFBE for knowledge and skills transfer to enable them to gradually take over the project's activities. In this regard, 
MFBE will nominate procurement personnel (counterpart staff) for skill transfer during project implementation. Also, the 
implementing agency procurement capacity will be enhanced through on-the job training, Hands-on Extended 
Implementation Support (HEIS) and mentoring by the World Bank’s Procurement Team during the project 
implementation. In addition, designated procurement staff will be encouraged to register and undertake professional 
procurement courses. Project Implementation Units (PIUs), established in the FMS Ministry of Fisheries, will be led by a 
State Project Coordinator (SPC) with dual reporting lines to the Project Coordinator and the DG of the respective FMS 
fisheries ministries. The PIU and FMS Ministries of fisheries will be responsible for the coordination and implementation 
of project activities in FMS, in particular in fishing communities, and will be involved in procurement activities.  
 
70. 
Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment. The procurement capacity assessment was conducted at MFBE, the 
implementing agency. The objectives of the assessment were: (a) to evaluate the management capability of the 
implementing agency to effectively carry out the procurement processes; (b) to assess the adequacy of the systems that 
are in place to administer procurement; (c) to assess the quality and effectiveness of the Procurement arrangements when
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 28 of 61  
 
putting Procurement procedures into practice; (d) to assess the procurement process and market readiness; (e) to develop 
an action plan to be implemented as part of the project in order to address the deficiencies detected by the assessment 
aimed at minimizing the risks identified; and (f) to propose procurement supervision plans for the World Bank considering 
the relative strengths and weaknesses and risks revealed by the assessment. The assessment found that (i) the 
Implementing Agency does not have previous experience with World Bank financed operations (ii) the national 
procurement law is not fully operational; (iii) there is weak capacity of bidders/suppliers – bidders are not familiar with 
bidding procedures of public procurement. Thus, sometimes bids submitted are of poor quality and with unintentional 
deficiencies that end up being rejected; (iv) the inadequate experience in contract management; (v) this being a fragile 
environment, the market is unstable and sometimes suffers from limited interest from international 
contractors/consultants or high price bids/proposals because of country security risk and this sometimes leads to low 
response to published tenders and also the market is impacted by fraud and corruption risk (including collusion and 
outside interference in contracting process; (vi) lack of adequate complaint handling mechanism (there is no standardized 
complaint handling system in place known to the bidding community to review and resolve complaint/disputes at 
appropriate stages of the procurement cycle; and (vii) weak legal and financial institutions (commercial Banks and 
Insurance agencies) are not well established.  
 
71. 
Proposed mitigation measures include (a) establishment of PMU with a dedicated Procurement Specialist with 
relevant and adequate qualifications and experience acceptable to the World Bank and ensuring that the Project 
Operations Manual (POM) includes a well described procurement management process, (b) training of the project 
implementing agency staff by the World Bank on the Procurement Regulations; (c) on high-risk procurement activities, 
but below prior review threshold, the procurement prior review will be continued with justification, (d) enhance the 
oversight and supervision of procurement activities, (e) creating awareness among the government, private sector, and 
other stakeholders on the key issues regarding integrity in procurement and financial management; (f) supporting 
procurement reforms; (g) encourage international firms to have joint ventures with local firms due to insecurity; (h) 
establishment of an effective complaint handling system known to the bidding community to review and resolve 
complaints and (i) the Client may request HEIS throughout the project duration to directly assist project procurement 
activities for large, complex and high-risk contracts.  
 
72. 
Risk Assessment: Based on the above, the risk for procurement is considered “High.” The risk is reduced to a 
residual rating of “Substantial” in view of the mitigation measures proposed. 
 
73. 
Systematic tracking of exchanges in procurement (STEP). The World Bank’s STEP system will be used to prepare, 
clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of the PMU will be trained in using 
STEP. 
 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate 
Legal Operational Policies 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60 
No
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 29 of 61  
 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
74. 
The project’s potential environmental risks and impacts are related to relatively small-scale infrastructure and 
capacity building investments in the fisheries sector in Somalia. The project’s overall Environmental and Social Risk rating 
is ‘High.’ Environmental risks are rated as ‘Substantial’ and relate to risks and impacts associated with civil works, 
contamination of aquatic systems and water quality due to organic waste and wastewater, oil leakage from fishing vessels, 
hazardous materials, and chemicals during the operation of these facilities. The project is not expected to generate a large 
volume of hazardous waste during construction and operation. The implementing agencies (IAs) have weak capacities and 
limited knowledge and experience in applying ESF during subproject implementation and preparation, posing additional 
risks. However, this will be mitigated by the implementation of a program for ESF capacity building which is described in 
some detail in the project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Social risks are rated ‘High.’ The project 
will also need to consider potential tensions between and within communities overfishing rights and access to new public 
infrastructure. Beyond these specific inclusion and conflict risk, the project will have to carefully treat any land needs and 
consequent resettlement questions for small-scale community infrastructure, even though strong consultations with 
beneficiary communities and the small-scale investments may be expected to reduce the risk level. The applicability of 
ESS7 will be clarified during subproject preparation. Questions on security of project workers and beneficiaries have been 
addressed in the draft Security Management Framework, which has been submitted formally to the World Bank for review 
and clearance.  
 
75. 
The proposed investments will be located in existing Somali fishing communities, with a first set in 12 locations 
identified with the FGS and FMS during preparation.27 Modification of habitats are not expected to have adverse impacts 
on critical natural habitats or forests, archaeological or historical sites. While the project may lead to increased 
community-based, small-scale fishing, improvement of the fisheries’ regulatory framework should overall reduce 
overfishing risks. The main adverse environmental risks and impacts during construction would be associated with the 
critical small-scale fisheries infrastructure construction or rehabilitation with the potential for marine works interference 
with coastal processes causing erosion or accretion. There are risks of temporary waterway and road traffic disturbance, 
and possible water quality degradation and impacts to aquatic species. These risks and impacts are mostly temporary, 
predictable, and reversible or avoidable by careful design work. Due to ongoing conflict and terrorism, security risks are 
widespread in Somalia. Security issues need to be carefully assessed and managed in selected locations for interventions 
as well as in Mogadishu and in FMS capitals. There are a range of contextual risks of operating in conflict zones like Somalia 
with complex social contexts, and effective and inclusive community consultations and meaningful stakeholder 
engagement remains challenging.   
 
76. 
The SEA/SH risk, rated as substantial, relates to Component 1 (which involves small-scale fisheries value chains). 
The project induce risks of GBV/SEAH can persist due to social and structural inequalities that create vulnerable conditions 
such as lack of access to fisheries resources, dangers of trafficking targeting women and girls offering the promise of work, 
food and/or fish products. Also, shifting social and power dynamics regarding fisheries roles may limit women’s ability to 
fully participate in the economic opportunities and decision-making by exposing many of them to various forms of GBV, 
including harassment, particularly when securing licenses or other related business permits along the coastlines. The 
contextual risks for GBV (including SEA/SH) are generally high in Somalia. The SEA/SH prevention and response action plan 
has been prepared as part of the ESMF.   
 
77. 
Technical assistance in Components 1 and 2 will be gender-responsive by: (i) raising awareness of the 
prospective, collaborative and complementary roles of men and women; (ii) identifying the capacity building needs to 
realize these roles in the fisheries sector; (iii) mainstreaming women in policy leadership; and capitalizing on their technical 
expertise to integrate women in the management, enforcement, and research activities. To mitigate the risk of
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 30 of 61  
 
interventions exacerbating gender inequalities, GBV and SEAH, the project will seek a) equal participation of men and 
women where possible; b) to ensure women’s voice will be heard in meetings and women’s representation on committees 
and c) to ensure firms designing infrastructure facilities will explicitly include the needs of men and women based on best 
practices and the inputs of both groups. The project activities will incorporate gender considerations throughout. These 
include recommendations in the World Bank Gender Action Plan, the recently FGS-endorsed Women in Maritime Sector 
Action Plan and the Gendered Fisheries Development in Somalia Report. Actions include gender consideration in feasibility 
studies, infrastructure designs, capacity building and training including GBV, value chain improvement plans and the 
provision of equipment. Where pertinent, analytical and diagnostic studies will include gender and broader social inclusion 
aspects. The client is encouraged to ensure gender responsiveness in hiring of PMU and PIU staffing through awareness 
raising and targeted gender participation (interviewers and interviewees) in recruitment processes and management 
activities. 
 
78. 
To mitigate these environmental and social risks, the project has prepared and disclosed the Environmental and 
Social Commitment Plan and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), both disclosed in-country on April 2, 2024.39 The 
project has held consultations in the country, including meetings with stakeholders in December 2023 and February 2024, 
which were organized by the Ministry of Fisheries in Mogadishu, where substantial amount of input into efficacy of the 
project’s environmental and social risks mitigation measures were received and incorporated into the project design. The 
project has also prepared other ESF instruments, including a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), which will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before disbursement of funds for Component 2. To 
effectively manage marine resources through an ecosystem approach, the ESMF will ensure the conservation of marine 
resources sustainability and the resilience of related ecosystems. Capacity building on the ESMF and inclusion of local 
fishing communities in fisheries management will ensure resilience and sustainability. The technical support to MFBE (FGS) 
to strengthen its capacity to manage, implement, and monitor project activities, will also support local community 
resilience and sustainability efforts. The development of well-informed social risk management instruments and grievance 
redress mechanism is expected to ensure a smooth flow of project implementation with minimal interruptions at the 
community level where implementation of infrastructure activities takes place. The project has also prepared a draft 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment (SEAH) Prevention and Response Action Plan, a draft Labor Management 
Procedures (LMP), a draft Security Management Framework, and a draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), all of 
which are now under review by the World Bank and shall be disclosed after clearance. During implementation, sub-project 
specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments, and Environmental and Social Management Plans will be 
developed as needed and proportional to the site risk level, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to commencement of civil 
works. Based on the Project Security Management Framework, these site-specific instruments will also contain site-
specific security management plans as relevant and appropriate for the respective geographic area.
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES 
 
79. 
Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project 
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address project-
related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent 
Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or 
could occur, because of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, 
which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. 
Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank 
 
39 Available on the MFBE website at https://mfbe.gov.so/badmaal-project/
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 31 of 61  
 
Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit 
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on 
how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
 
VI. KEY RISKS 
 
80. 
The overall risk for of the project is considered High. 
 
81. 
The political and governance risk is High. Division of roles and responsibilities between the FGS and FMS is not 
yet fully anchored in the policy, legal and regulatory frameworks, although progress has been made in the Fisheries Law 
and the operationalization of the FMDC. The FGS’s ability to effectively lead, coordinate and provide guidance is yet to be 
established, risking limited participation of the FMS in the project. The project will support the FMDC as a platform for 
policy dialogue and decisions on fisheries governance. This will secure regular interactions and consultations with the FGS 
and FMS and reduce the risk of not engaging. The first FMDC meetings took place in November 2023 and February 2024 
and will meet on a quarterly basis. Political pressure may interfere with some activities. The project will base its work on 
an assessment of stakeholder needs and will document criteria for prioritization of investments. In addition, the Inter-
Governmental Fiscal Federalism Forum support high-level dialogue on cooperation and collaboration between the FGS 
and the FMS, including with regards to revenue generation, and the Financial Governance Committee provides high-level 
dialogue forum for dialogue on strategic financial governance issues and will also support risk mitigation through their 
oversight. 
 
82. 
The macroeconomic risk is Substantial. The increasing capacity of the government to respond to external shocks 
on the nascent formal economy remains relatively weak. Since agriculture, including fisheries, is the economy mainstay, 
climate shocks could lower output including fish production, damage coastal infrastructure, exacerbate water stress, and 
displace people. Successive droughts and heavy rains, such as those in 2017 and 2019 and worsening drought conditions 
since 2020, have taken a large toll on the country and on coastal infrastructure which is significantly degraded or no longer 
functional in many locations. This adds to the humanitarian challenges. Despite challenges from COVID-19, the protracted 
election process, severe drought conditions, and rising global food and energy prices, GDP continued to increase in 2020, 
2021 and 2022. The persistent cycle of shocks increases Somalis’ vulnerability to future shocks as there is limited public 
and private insurance and access to finance. Furthermore, economic activity especially to expand the fisheries sector is 
likely to continue to be exposed to significant risks related to insecurity in Mogadishu and south-central Somalia. The 
project activities are fully financed by grants, which mitigates the risk of counterpart funding. In addition, the project will 
support the strengthening of disaster risk management (DRM) and support revenue generation through fisheries which 
will contribute to the reduction of medium-term macroeconomic risks.  
 
83. 
The sector strategies and policies risk is High. The strategic framework for the development of Somali fisheries 
(Fisheries Master Plan, 2023) is recent and still needs to be implemented. A new Fisheries Law was adopted in March 
2023, and provides the basis for governance arrangements but needs to be harmonized between the FGS and FMS. The 
sustainable development of the Somali fisheries sector has been hampered by IUU fishing, primarily Illegal and 
Unregulated, many of which are authorized, licensed, and even flagged by the Somali administration, in violation of the 
law. These activities seem to be largely influenced by politically connected individuals, both in the FGS and FMS. Other 
constraints stem from weak capacity and low resource availability for fisheries management by the FGS and FMS. The 
project will manage this risk by supporting the FMDC for dialogue and coordination on policy decisions and cohesive 
national management approaches. In addition, the project will promote increased transparency in the sector. The project 
will also convene dialogues, both formal and informal, to organize key stakeholders around key issues that could impact
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 32 of 61  
 
the success of the project. Given that continued fishing by unlawfully licensed vessels would result in significant ecological 
and economic harm to the sector and undermine efforts to achieve the PDO, investment and activities could be stopped 
at the request of the FGS or the World Bank if there is proof that the FMS or the FGS have issued licenses in contravention 
of the provisions of the federal fisheries law. 
 
84. 
The technical design of the project risk is Substantial. Inherent in all fisheries operations is a tension between 
the need to focus on the sustainability of fishing operations and the poverty reduction goals, which call for the generation 
of revenue for targeted beneficiaries. The project aims to address this tension by focusing on the two parallel but 
complementary components. The first component aims to build the capacity of fishing communities to benefit from 
improved fisheries management, while the second component lay a strong foundation of a system for fisheries governance 
that will require considerable investment at the institutional and technical levels. An important risk mitigation measure is 
the intent to increase the value as well reduce post-harvest losses, or to ensure that fishermen fish better rather than 
necessarily more. The complementarity of the two components is also important as none can bear fruits without the 
others. To manage expectations of the beneficiaries, the project is designed to ensure that concrete results are achieved 
shortly after implementation, whereas the ramp up in technical and institutional capacity building will be spread 
throughout the duration of the project. 
 
85. 
Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk is High. In addition to challenges linked to the 
clear roles and responsibilities of FGS and FMS stakeholders, capacity at all implementation levels is still emerging. A 
capacity assessment will be undertaken to identify capacity building activities required to support the sector. To 
sustainably build capacity of the institutions involved, to the extent possible, project activities will include capacity building 
and mentoring providing a basis for “learning-by-doing”, in particular for the staff of the ministries in charge of fisheries 
at FGS and FMS levels. Relationships with existing non-government actors and private sector organizations, will be 
established to support and complement the work of the FGS and FM and qualified service-providers will be engaged to 
supplement and build government capacity.    
 
86. 
Fiduciary risks are High. The financial management and procurement environment in Somalia remain challenging 
with potential for mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency and corruption. Although anticorruption and public-sector 
regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. At the national 
level, weak and fragmented FM and procurement frameworks are compounded by inadequate institutional and human 
capacities. Within the fisheries sector, the ministries in charge at FGS and FMS also have emerging financial management 
capacity. For the project, FM and procurement responsibilities will be centralized in the MFBE, with no procurement and 
FM undertaken at state levels. In addition, Financial Management will be done in accordance with the government’s 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedures Manual (COAPM) and Project Operations Manual (POM). Project 
FM arrangements will be mainstreamed into country systems and supported by the EAFS unit of the Accountant General’s 
Office. World Bank’s FM supervision will be essential, and mitigation measures for fiduciary issues (e.g., strict fiduciary 
control mechanisms, application of World Bank FM and procurement rules) will be built into the project design.   
 
87. 
Environmental and social risks are High. The project environmental and social risks and impacts relate to 
relatively small-scale infrastructure and capacity building investments in the fisheries sector in Somalia; overall expecting 
positive development impacts in a very challenging context. Some project activities, i.e., infrastructure construction and 
rehabilitation could pose temporary negative risks and impacts. Risks of pollution related to the generation of dust, waste, 
and wastewater could impact communities and coastal ecosystem. Project activities may cause soil erosion and land 
subsidence during the construction of priority small-scale infrastructure facilities. Other risks include possible disruption 
of waterway traffic and traffic disturbances due to transportation of materials for infrastructure upgrades. On the social 
side, the project will have the potential to provide alternative livelihood options, through fishing, processing and other
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
The World Bank 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
Page 33 of 61  
 
fisheries services for people, including for people engaged in activities related to conflict, violence, and piracy; as such the 
project needs to consider risks from backlashes when leaving their previous livelihoods. The project will also need to 
consider potential tensions between communities over fishing rights and access to new public infrastructure. In addition, 
Somalia entails significant GBV risks and the project-specific risk is considered substantial. GBV service provision remains 
low as compared to the need and geographical landscape in Somalia. The project is designed to have positive 
environmental and social impacts, directly targeting fishing communities and the resources they exploit. The project will 
be implemented in fragile areas affected by poverty, drought, and conflict. Given that the design and location of the 
infrastructure may not be fully identified during preparation, a framework approach to managing environment and social 
standards is used. Overall, Somalia presents a unique and challenging security risk environment. Project implementation 
will be undertaken in coastal areas, where threats from terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab exist against Somali and 
international partners. A Security Management Framework (SMF) has been formulated to address this risk. This will be 
the first project funded by the World Bank that will be implemented by the Ministry of Fisheries, an entity whose 
administrative structures have only been established in the last few years. As a result, capacity within the Ministry remains 
generally low in relation to the management of environmental and social risks and will need to be strengthened 
significantly in the course of project implementation. 
 
88. 
Stakeholder risk is Substantial. The project will engage a large and diverse array of stakeholders including 
government officials at the federal and state level, fishing communities, universities, private sector, international partners 
etc. Tensions and frictions between the various groups can be strong and can evolve quickly. To promote ownership of 
the project by this diverse group, project design will include a comprehensive stakeholder engagement plan. This plan will 
include stakeholder identification and analysis, plans for engagement (e.g., type, regularity, etc.), communication activities 
and grievance redress mechanisms. This plan will clearly outline both the initial and ongoing process by which stakeholders 
will be engaged to ensure the design of the project aligns with stakeholders’ current and ongoing needs. The CMU and 
partners will be canvased to ensure all stakeholders are invited to participate in relevant consultations and presentations. 
The project will use various lines of communication and engagement opportunities to communicate and coordinate with 
stakeholders/partners.
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project(P178032) 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 61 
 
VII.  RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate 
 
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
Baseline 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Period 6 
Closing Period 
Climate informed fisheries management plans formulated, and implemented (Number)  
Climate informed fisheries management plans formulated and implemented (Number)  
Apr/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2030 
2 
3 
11 
17 
20 
20 
  
20 
➢Of which Co-management plans in place and operational (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2030 
2 
2 
7 
11 
14 
14 
  
14 
FMDC meetings (Number)  
Nov/2023 
Jun/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
1 
3 
7 
11 
15 
19 
23 
26 
Fishing communities with improved capacity to benefit (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2030 
0 
2 
8 
12 
12 
12 
  
12 
➢Of which at least 25% of beneficiaries are women (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2030 
0 
1 
4 
6 
6 
6 
  
6 
Project Beneficiaries (direct) (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2032 
0 
10000 
35000 
100000 
125000 
145000 
  
165000 
➢of which are women (Percentage)  
0 
2 
5 
12 
20 
25 
  
30 
➢of which are Blue economy practitioners with an enhanced capacity to advance inclusion of women (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
  
Jun/2030 
0 
0 
50 
100 
200 
250 
  
360 
Reduction of food loss and waste in targeted value chains (Percentage)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2027 
  
  
  
  
  
Jun/2030
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project(P178032) 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 61 
 
0 
2 
  
  
  
  
  
5 
Intermediate Indicators by Components 
Baseline 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Closing Period 
Increasing the Capacity of Dependent Communities to Benefit from Sustainable Marine Fisheries  
Climate resilient infrastructure built or rehabilitated and operational (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
2 
8 
13 
14 
15 
15 
Targeted MSMEs benefitting from implementation of value chain improvement plans (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
5 
15 
40 
70 
100 
100 
➢Share of targeted MSMEs benefitted from implementation of value chain improvement plans of which owned/led by women (Percentage)  
0 
0 
6 
10 
17 
20 
20 
Value (USD/kg) increases from improved handling from fisheries under improved management (Percentage)  
Jun/2024 
Jun/2027 
  
  
  
  
Jun/2030 
0 
5 
  
  
  
  
10 
Strengthening Marine Fisheries Governance and Management  
Fish stocks with their status determined (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Co-management arrangements with at-least 10% women participation (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
6 
8 
➢Of which at least one woman in an executive position in its governance body (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
6 
8 
Patrol days (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
50 
100 
200 
400 
500 
760 
Registers of fishers, fishing vessels and licences developed and operational (Number)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
0 
1 
3 
3 
3 
3 
Fisheries policies, legal and regulatory texts adopted at FGS and FMS levels (Number)
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project(P178032) 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 61 
 
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
2 
6 
12 
18 
25 
34 
Large scale industrial fishing vessels observed conducting serious Illegal activities during patrols (Percentage)  
Dec/2023 
Jun/2027 
  
  
  
  
Jun/2030 
No data 
10 
  
  
  
  
20 
Revenue generated from licensing fees annually (Amount(USD))  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
1,000,000 
1,000,000 
1,500,000 
1,500,000 
2,000,000 
2,500,000 
3,000,000 
Project Management Monitoring and Evaluation  
Beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on project interventions (Percentage)  
Jan/2024 
Jun/2027 
  
  
  
  
Jun/2030 
No data 
35 
  
  
  
  
80
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 61 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
 
Climate-informed fisheries management plans formulated and implemented (Number) 
• 
Of which Co-management plans in place and operational (Number) 
Description 
This indicator will measure the number of climate-informed fisheries management plans that are formulated 
and implemented, including co-management plans, which include measures that can be adapted to climate 
driven changes in fish populations or their ecosystems (e.g. seasonal closure, spatial closures, catch limits, etc.). 
These plans enable fishers and other stakeholders to adapt to or withstand fluctuations stemming from climate 
change (e.g. warming waters). Implementation is the regular actions being taken by officials, fishers, and other 
value chain actors consistent with fisheries management plans.  
Two co-management agreements are currently in place in Somalia. The project will support the development 
and implementation of six fisheries management plans for selected fisheries at FGS and FMS levels, and 12 
associated co-management plans. Fisheries co-management is a partnership arrangement in which a community 
of local resource users (fishers) and government, with other stakeholders, share the responsibility and authority 
for the management of a fishery. 
 
Implementation of management plans will be measured by: 
- 
Management plans, including effective* management measures, developed in a participatory manner, 
adopted at FGS and/or FMS level 
- 
Stakeholders’ awareness raised on adopted management measures 
- 
Initiation of enforcement activities for adopted management measures 
 
Implementation of co-management plans will be measured by: 
- 
Agreement between authorities and communities, according to the law, in place 
- 
Meeting of co-management committees are least twice a year 
- 
Local registry of vessels, fishers and gear in place 
 
* Effective means that measures should be well informed through available science and aimed at resources 
sustainability 
 
This indicator will inform PROBLUE Indicator C.8 Fisheries under sustainable management (number) and B.16. 
Policies, regulations, strategies, and/or plans informed by PROBLUE (number). 
 
This indicator will inform the World Bank Group Scorecard result indicator Millions of hectares of terrestrial and 
aquatic areas under enhanced conservation and management which will be tracked by the Client through the 
measurement of the areas covered by the management plans. 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Progress reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting and release of approved management plan 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE and relevant FMS 
FMDC meetings (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the level of regular policy dialogue and coordination on fisheries governance and 
development which will benefit FGS and FMS. The FMDC is a highlevel plateform set up by the 2023 federal 
fisheries law, which membership includes the Fisheries Minister of the FGS (Chair) and all Fisheries Ministers 
from te FMS. FMDC meetings will be concluded by official communiqué which will describe agreed actions for 
implementation by the FGS and FMS. The law mandates the FMDC to meet on a quarterly basis. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
FMDC communiqués and progress reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 61 
 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Fishing communities with improved capacity to benefit (Number) 
• 
Of which at least 25% of beneficiaries are women (Number) 
Description 
At each selected location, for the benefit of the local fishing community, households involved in fishing and 
associated activities, this indicator will measure the improvement of the capacity to sustainably benefit through 
the provision of a combination of inputs from the project including a) fisheries infrastructure, b) value-chain 
improvements, c) improved ownership through co-management and d) associated capacity building activities. 
 
This indicator will also measure the level at which women participating or who want to enter the sector are 
benefitting from project interventions. 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Surveys, reporting from infrastructure and/or co-management governance body 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Beneficiaries (Number), of which are women(Percentage), and of which are Blue Economy practioners (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the number of people who directly benefit from project activities including capacity 
building, training, equipment, participation in co-management, and from the establishment and operation of 
infrastructure. Beneficiaries will include community members as well as staff from fisheries authorities, 
including fisheries staff with PROBLUE funded gender training 
This will inform PROBLUE Indicator C.1 Beneficiaries (number), of which women (%), and of which from 
disadvantaged groups (%) and PROBLUE indicator B.20 Blue economy practitioners with an enhanced capacity 
to advance inclusion of women / persons from disadvantaged groups 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Workshop and training participants list, membership lists, and infrastrucuture user surveys;  Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE and FMS MoF regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE and FMS MoF 
Reduction of food loss and waste in targetted value chains (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator measure the decrease (by weight) in the level of fish loss and waste for targetted value chains 
from catch to distribution in Somalia. Methodology is based on FAO’s Food Loss and Waste Assessment 
guidance. This indicator will also be a proxy to inform poverty and food insecurity, since reducing food loss and 
waste results in more fish to sell and buy which increases incomes, food security, climate change resilience, and 
fish of better quality and nutritional value. It also informs efficiency in fishing to reduce overexploitation and 
maintain robust fish stock and resilience of marine ecosystem. While reports estimates FL&W is estimated to 
range between 25% and 40%, a study has been launched under the PPA to determine the baseline. The study 
will be repeated at mid-term and towards the end of the project to measure reductoin. It is expected that the 
project will contribute to a reudction of five percent from the initial level of FL&W. 
Frequency 
Baseline survey in year 1; mid-term and at closing 
Data source 
Consultants’ reports on Food Loss and Waste and progress reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 61 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
Component: Increasing the capacity of dependent communities to benefit from sustainable marine fisheries  
Climate informed infrastructure built or rehabilitated and operational (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the number of built or rehabilitated climate-informed infrastructure investments 
(landing sites, cold stores, markets, jetties, etc.) that are operational. Operationalization will be supported by 
implementation of a business plan and the adoption of a management structure. Climate resilient infrastructure 
has elements/measures that are adapted to or can withstand fluctuations stemming from climate change (e.g. 
storm surges, sea level rise, and flooding). It is expected that the project will support the construction of 12 
small-scale fisheries infrastructure facilities, and three more complex infrastructure facilities for landing such as 
jetties.  
Frequency 
Anually 
Data source 
Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE and FMS MoF regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Targeted MSMEs benefitting from implementation of value chain improvement plans (Number) 
• 
Share of targeted MSMEs benefitted from implementation of value chain improvement plans of which owned/led by women (%) 
Description 
This indicator measures MSMEs (formal and informal) conducting commercial activities that are provided with 
training, capacity building including financial information, equipment and market analyses aligned to value chain 
improvement plans (or similar). Iimplementation is the regular actions being taken by officials, fishers, and other 
value chain actors consistent with value chain improvement plans. This indicator will reflect Private Capital 
Enabled (PCE). 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE and FMS MoF regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Value (USD/Kg) increases from from improved handling from fisheries under improved management (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator will measure the increase in the value (inflation adjusted), i.e. sale price, of fish handled by 
beneficiaries of capacity building, training, equipment, participation in co-management and from the 
establishment and operation of infrastructure and implementation of value chain improvement plans, where 
the supply stems from fisheries under improved management (fishing activities and related stocks). 
Frequency 
Survey at mid and at closing. 
Data source 
Survey of beneficiaries at targetted infrastructure 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Component 2. Strengthening climate resilient marine fisheries goverance and management 
Fish stocks with their status determined (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the number of targeted fish stocks for which their status has been determined using 
qualitative, quantitative or semi-quantitative methods at least once during the course of the project. As fisheries 
data and statistics remain scare, data-poor methods are likely to be used. Stock is as defined in the Fisheries 
Law. 
 
This indicator is aligned with the World Bank Group Scorecard following indicator: Proportion of fish stocks 
within biologically sustainable levels. 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Progress reporting
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 61 
 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Co-management arrangements with at least 10% women participation , of whichat least one woman is in an executive position in its 
governance body (Number)  
Description 
This indicator measures the level of meaningful participation and uptake of leadership roles by females involved 
in fisheries co-management committees. Committee members have a decision-making role. 
This will inform PROBLUE Indicator C.2. People participating in planning and decision-making on the Blue 
Economy (number), of which women (%), of which women in decision-making roles (%) 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE and FMS MoF regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Patrol days (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the annual number of days of offshore and coastal surveillance activities (at least 6 
hours of surveillance) each year. Surveilance activities can be conducted from shore, sea or air. 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE and FMS MoF regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Registers of fishers, fishing vessels and licences developed and operational (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures the development and operationalisation of three registers for  fisher, fishing vessels and 
licensing  servicing the FGS and all FMS. Operationalization refers to activities underway to populate or update 
the registers consistent with the project Fisheries Information Management System manuals/guides. 
Frequency 
Semi-Annually 
Data source 
Progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Fisheries policies, legal and regulatory texts adopted at FGS and/or FMS levels (Number) 
Description 
This indicator measures developed or updated FGS and FMS fisheries policies, laws and regulations to 
implement the 2023 Fisheries Act. 
This will inform PROBLUE Indicator B.16 Policies, regulations, strategies, and/or plans informed by PROBLUE 
(number) 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Observations and MFBE and FMS progress reporting 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Large scale industrial fishing vessels observed conducting serious Illegal activities during patrols (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator measures the level of serious illegal activities related to fishing vessels (licensed or unlicensed) and 
their operations detected by inspections, air surveillance, offshore patrols or coastal patrol efforts in Somali 
waters. This will be measured as a percentage of the observation of large-scale industrial fishing vessels 
observed during patrols. An illegal activity is serious when its fine level is 5 or higher as described in the First 
Schedule of the Fisheries Law.  Large-scale industrial fishing vessels includes domestic and foreign vessels 
requiring a license to fish outside of the 24 nm boundary for Somali waters as described in the Fisheries Law. A 
vessel, observed to be conducting more than one illegal activity in the same observation will only be counted 
once. This indicator is expressed as vessels with illegal activities/all vessels observed over one year.
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 61 
 
As there was no patrolling activity before the project, there is no data for baseline  
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Patrol reports and progress reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MFBE regular reporting 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE and relevant FMS 
Revenue generated from licensing fees annually (USD) (Amount (USD)) 
Description 
This indicator measures the total revenue generated from fees paid for licences for foreign vessels to fish in 
Somalia’s EEZas described in the Fisheries Law (2023). 
Under this indicator, licenses should be published on the MFBE website which will inform PROBLUE Indicator 
C.10 on public disclosure of key fisheries-related information 
Frequency 
Annually 
Data source 
Receipt issued for licenses 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Review by the Ministry of Finance and the Financial Goernance Committee 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE 
Project Management 
Beneficiaries with rating ‘Satisfied’ or above on project interventions (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator measures the share of the target population expressing satisfaction with the provided project 
interventions 
Frequency 
Mid-term and at closing 
Data source 
Surveys 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Surveys 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MFBE
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 61 
 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan 
 
1. 
The Ministry of Fisheries and Blue Economy of the Federal Government of Somalia (MFBE) will serve as the 
main coordinating implementor for the project. It will work closely with Ministries in charge of fisheries in all Federal 
Member States of the Federal Republic of Somalia (FMS), the fisheries department of the Banadir Regional Administration 
(BRA). MFBE will be responsible for coordination of activities, overseeing overall implementation and ensure 
harmonization of processes development under the project. FMS will be in charge of supporting implementation of 
activities on the ground in targeted communities, ensuring consultations are properly conducted. While the MFBE will 
serve as the leading ministries, other ministries also play a role in fisheries governance and management, including the 
Ministry of Ports and Maritime Transport, the Ministry of Justice.  
 
2. 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established within the MFBE. The PMU will handle all procurement, 
financial and ESF responsibilities of the project (Table A1.1). The PMU will work closely with the FMS and the BRA to 
identify the needs, develop ToRs and specifications, and relevant representatives of these institutions will be actively 
engaged in procurement activities. The PMU structure will be adapted to the needs and activities of the project if 
necessary, during implementation. Lean Project Implementation Units (PIU) will be established in FMS’ Ministries of 
fisheries to coordinate the implementation of the activities at State level. 
Table A1.1. PMU and PIUs Composition 
MFBE PMU 
FMS & BRA PIUs 
1 Coordinator 
1 Environmental Specialist 
1 Social Development Specialist 
1 Procurement Specialist 
1 Financial Management Specialist 
1 M&E Specialist 
1 Communication Specialist (part time) 
1 State Coordinator 
 
3. 
The Director General Technical Working Group will serve as the Project Steering Committee and will meet 
ordinarily twice a year. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the DG of the MFBE and include all other DG of fisheries 
of the FMS and of the BRA (Figure A1.1). The PMU will play the role of secretariat, without a voting right. Representatives 
of other Ministries or of stakeholder groups may participate as observers, without a voting right. The Steering Committee 
will review and provide guidance on annual work plans and budgets, as well as on other strategic issues related to the 
project. The Steering Committee will also report to the Fisheries Management and Development Council (FMDC) which is 
constituted by all the Minister of fisheries of the FGS and the Ministers of fisheries of the FMS. Additional details on the 
functioning of the Steering Committee will be included in the Implementation Manual.
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 61 
 
Figure A1.1: Project Structures 
  
 
 
 
 
4. 
Coordination with partners and parallel initiatives. Partnerships will be key to implementing project activities 
such as MCS, co-management and value chain improvements, and engaging the private sector. Other initiatives in the 
fishing sector are supported by development partners, e.g., FAO, EU and USAID. A donors coordination group which the 
World Bank is a member of meets regularly. Participation in this group ensures that duplication of effort is avoided and 
opportunities for the project to scale up and build on successful activities are promoted. Where possible, the government 
will be encouraged to use and scale up existing contracting and partnership arrangements with relevant development 
partners, UN agencies and civil society organizations.  
 
Implementation Support Plan 
 
5. 
The objective of implementation support is to assist relevant counterparts in the effective implementation of 
the project, in accordance with World Bank policies and procedures. To achieve this in an efficient manner, 
implementation support must be adaptive, focusing on key risks and risk mitigation measures identified. The World Bank 
has put in place a task team comprising a diverse skill mix. Skill sets required for continuous effective implementation 
support include, among others, project management, fisheries management, community development, fisheries 
infrastructure/engineering, value chain improvement planning, legal, private sector finance, M&E, procurement, financial 
management, communication and information and communication technologies.  
 
6. 
The implementation support strategy leverages the following key instruments to review progress and address 
implementation challenges and opportunities, among others:
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 61 
 
(a) M&E of progress toward the PDO. The TTLs will coordinate and oversee project implementation support, ensuring 
regular communication with the MFBE, deployment of resources to address any project implementation 
challenges, and monitoring of the project’s progress toward the PDO; 
(b) Implementation support mission. The World Bank will conduct semi-annual Implementation Support Missions. 
These will aim to assess the quality and pace of implementation, providing recommendations towards addressing 
bottlenecks and the effective achievement of the PDO. This will entail: (i) reviewing implementation progress by 
component (including the level of implementation of recommendations made by prior missions), including 
institutional development aspects; (ii) proposing and agreeing on solutions to implementation problems; (iii) 
reviewing the action and disbursement plans, and updating relevant forecasts; (iv) reviewing the project’s 
fiduciary aspects, including regarding financial management and procurement; (v) verifying compliance of project 
activities with the fiduciary agreement and the World Bank’s environmental and social framework; and (vi) 
reviewing M&E systems and the respective results within the context of targets set within the results framework.  
(c) Mid-term review (MTR). An MTR will be carried out midway in the implementation phase. It will include a 
comprehensive assessment of the progress in achieving the project objectives as laid out in the results framework. 
The MTR will also serve as a platform for adjusting Project design considering challenges and emerging 
opportunities. 
(d) Other reviews. As needed, the World Bank and Government counterparts will consider the need for additional 
analytical, advisory, knowledge sharing activities and/or third-party reviews. Such reviews may be planned for 
over and above the semi-annual implementation support missions.  
(e) Implementation completion. At the end of the implementation for the project, the Government of Somalia and 
the World Bank will carry out separate implementation completion and results reviews to assess the success of 
the project and draw lessons from its implementation. 
(f) Technical Assistance. Implementation support will include specialized technical support from the World Bank, as 
well as potentially from the FAO through the WB-FAO Cooperation Program under which FAO can provide 
technical support to World Bank projects.  
7. 
As the need arises, implementation support missions may be complemented by dedicated visits by individual 
specialists to follow up on specific thematic issues. The team will maintain consultants to provide technical support the 
PMU, PIUs and participating agencies.  
 
8. 
Financial Management and Procurement teams of the World Bank will closely supervise the program's fiduciary 
management. They will participate in the country implementation support missions and facilitate capacity building for the 
relevant staff of the PMU. 
 
9. 
On procurement, the World Bank will provide implementation support to the Recipient through, procurement 
training to program staff and relevant implementing agencies. Implementation support missions will be geared toward: 
(i) reviewing and updating procurement documents; (ii) providing detailed guidance on the World Bank’s Procurement 
Regulations; and (iii) monitoring procurement progress against the detailed Procurement Plan. 
 
10. 
The World Bank specialists in social and environmental aspects will support the adequate implementation of 
the ESF. Each year, they will conduct supervision of the program’s ESF activities, participate in meetings to discuss findings, 
and draft action plans to improve implementation.
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 61 
 
11. 
The project FM arrangements will be mainstreamed in the Accountant General’s office in line with the 
arrangements Use of Country Systems (UCS). The project accounting capacity will be headed by a consultant financial 
management specialist (FMS) at the PMU in coordination with the various finance officers in each of the PIUs. The team 
will be responsible for efficiency in payment processing, accurate recording and timely financial reporting through the 
Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS). The project FM capacity will be supported by the External 
Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) in the Office of the Accountant General to enhance segregation of functions and build 
capacity for full Use of Country Systems. 
 
12. 
The project will follow the Statements of Expenditure (SoE) method of disbursements. A designated account 
(DA) will be opened for the project at the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) where funds from the World Bank will be deposited 
and payments made for project activities (Figure A1.2). An initial advance will be made to the DA based on submission of 
withdrawal application to the Bank for an amount not to exceed the ceiling indicted in the Disbursement and Financial 
Information Letter (DFIL). Subsequent disbursements to the DA will be based on submission of withdrawal application 
accompanied by a Statement of Expenditures (SoE) incurred. As much as possible, consultants, contractors and suppliers 
will be paid through the direct payment method to mitigate the fiduciary risks associated with holding funds in the DA.   
 
Figure A1.2. Overview of project funds flow mechanism 
 
 
 
 
13. 
The project budget will be detailed in line with the Government Standard Chart of Accounts (SCoA) and mapped 
onto the Financial Management Information System. The budgeting process will follow the Government calendar.  The 
work plans, cash flow projections and budget will include the figures for the year analyzed by months and quarters. The 
cash budget for each month and quarter will reflect the detailed specifications for project activities, schedules (including 
Procurement Plan), and expenditure on project activities scheduled respectively for the quarter. The annual work plans, 
budget and the cash forecast will be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance before the final estimates are 
incorporated in the proposed annual appropriations which will be approved by parliament by December 31 every year.  
Budgetary control will be affected through the budget module in the SFMIS and quarterly interim financial reports 
submitted to the Bank.
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 of 61 
 
14. 
The EAFS in consultation with the PIU will ensure that requests for funds commitments/withdrawals, invoices 
and payment requests are consistent with signed contracts before processing and release of funds/payments. They will 
also monitor and report on the utilization of project funds, including the fiduciary standards and the reliability of the FM 
systems. A Project Fixed Assets Register will be prepared, regularly updated, and physical verification of assets routinely 
carried out by the EAFS. These Fixed Assets Register (FAR) in SFMIS will reflect details of suppliers; description and location 
of goods; original costs; disposal of assets; assets reference (identification) numbers; serial or registration numbers; dates 
of purchase; assets additions; condition of assets; assets’ useful life and residual value. The project will also maintain up 
to date register of contracts and related disbursements, imprest accounts and advances. 
 
15. 
The project internal control procedures and processes will be outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM), 
COAPM and the EAFS Manual. The PIU will initiate all transactions through payment requests to the EAFS for approval, 
prepare the withdrawal applications to World Bank and monitor outstanding balances of suppliers, consultants and 
contractors. Upon receipt, the Bank will channel the funds to the designated account or make direct payment to the 
vendor, consultant or contractor. The FGS Ministry of Finance (MOF) internal audit department will carry out annual 
internal audit of the project to strengthen internal controls. The main fiduciary risks relate to challenges of monitoring 
and supervision of planned construction of base infrastructure, (including processing facilities and technologies) under 
Component 1 to enable private sector investment in facilities (e.g., cold store and ice plant). This will be mitigated by the 
recruitment of a Supervising Engineer/firm to oversee the construction of the project infrastructure. Further a Monitoring 
Agent will be engaged to conduct independent monitoring of the project activities and report to the government and the 
World Bank. Further support is planned for supervision of the identified works and capacity building for operating and 
maintaining the infrastructure including financial sustainability. The project will also consider the use of remote 
monitoring and supervision mechanisms including the Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) tool 
to monitor project activities and outputs in hard-to-reach areas and Kobo toolbox for data collection, integration, and 
analysis. GEMS can be used as a platform to combine all relevant data, for remote supervision, real-time ESF monitoring, 
and portfolio mapping for coordination across projects and partners. 
 
16. 
The EAFS and the PIU will prepare Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IFRs) and submit to the World Bank not 
later than 45 days after the end of the quarter. These reports will provide accountability for previous disbursements and 
basis for subsequent withdrawals. The quarterly financial reports shall provide details on all funds received under the 
project as a whole as well as counterpart funds received under the project (if any). The reports will include a statement 
showing: period and cumulative inflows by sources and outflows by main expenditure classifications (components/sub-
components); beginning and ending cash balances of the project; and supporting schedules comparing actual and planned 
expenditures. Expenditures would be classified by component and by activities. The PIU will also prepare annual financial 
statements for the project which will be submitted for external audit within 3 months after the financial year end. External 
audit of the project financial statements will be conducted by the FGS Auditor General with necessary technical capacity 
support.  
17. 
The FGS Office of the Auditor General (OAG) is responsible to carry out independent audit of all public resources 
at the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS). As such, the OAG will carry out annual audit of the SFBEP activities. The 
project will allocate adequate funds to support the engagement of an external audit technical assistance to work with the 
staff of the respective Offices of the Auditor General. The Accountant General will be required to submit the project 
financial statements for the previous financial year to the OAG by 30 April annually. Subsequently, the Auditor General is 
expected to conduct the Financial Audit and submit to World Bank, the final Financial Audit Report and Management 
Letter by 30 June every year. 
 
18. 
Fraud and Corruption: Possibility of circumventing the internal control system with colluding practices as bribes, 
abuse of administrative positions, mis-procurement etc., is a critical issue and may include: (a) late submission of
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 of 61 
 
supporting documents; (b) poor filing and records; (c) lack of system integration; (d) lack of budget discipline; (e) 
unauthorized commitment to suppliers, bypassing budget and expenses vetting procedures; and (f) unsecured 
safekeeping and transportation of funds. These are mitigated as follows: (i) specific aspects on corruption auditing would 
be included in the external audit TOR; (ii) FM Procedures (as part of the Implementation Manual) approved and in 
operation for the project; (iii) strong FM arrangements (including qualified Project Accountants in the EAFS, (iv) periodic 
IUFRs including budget execution and monitoring; and (v) measures to improve social accountability and transparency are 
built into the projects’ design. 
 
19. 
Applicable procurement procedures. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s 
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers for Procurement of Goods, Works, Non-consulting Services and Consulting 
Services dated July 2016 and revised September 2023 (Procurement Regulations); the Guidelines on Preventing and 
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, revised July 1, 2016; and 
the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  
 
20. 
PPSD and PP. The Implementing Agency has prepared a PPSD and a PP for the first 18 months (about 1 and a half 
years) that were reviewed and cleared by the World Bank. The PP sets out the selection methods to be followed by the 
Client during the project implementation period and includes the cost estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review 
requirement, brief description of the activities/contracts and so on. The PP will be updated in agreement with the World 
Bank at least annually, or as required, to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall require 
World Bank approval.  
 
21. 
Systematic tracking of exchanges in procurement (STEP). The World Bank’s STEP system will be used to prepare, 
clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of the PMU will be trained in using 
STEP.  
 
22. 
Complaint Handling. For the procurement-related complaints, the Project will follow the procedure prescribed in 
the Procurement Regulations (Section III para. 3.27 - 3.32). 
 
23. 
Main procurement activities: 
  
i) Works: Building Works for Rehabilitation and/or construction FMS facilities in 5No Lots, Building Works for 
Rehabilitation and/or construction FGS facilities, Construction of Jetties, Construction/Rehabilitation of landing 
sites, Construction/rehabilitation of fish markets. 
ii) Goods: Fish processing plant equipment, Supply of Safety-at-Sea Equipment, Supply of Office Furniture and 
equipment for FMS and FGS, Procurement of Publicity Material, Equipment for enumerators, Supply of Small-
boats for coastal patrols. 
iii) Non-consulting services: Charter of vessel for patrol in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). 
iv) Consulting Services: Consulting Service for Fisheries Infrastructure Development Plan, Consulting services for 
Feasibility studies, ESIA and technical design for complex infrastructure (incl. jetties), Provision of Construction 
Supervision services, Mid-Term Evaluation, Consulting Service for Drafting of labor standards for fishers and fish-
workers, International TA on legal and regulatory matters for 36 months (renewable), Consultancy to develop 
Gender strategies in Fisheries Ministries and adoption of institutional policy reforms including gender at FGS and 
FMS, Provision of TA for Development of standards for export/import of fish and domestic market/trade, MCS 
Technical Assistant for 36 months (renewable), Development of SOPs for MCS, Development of database, FIMS 
and tools, incl. dashboard, TA for data collection, management and analysis for 36 months (renewable), State 
Coordinator for SW State 12 months (renewable), State Coordinator for Banaadir Administration 12 months
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 of 61 
 
(renewable), State Coordinator for Jubbaland State 12 months (renewable), State Coordinator for Galmudug State 
12 months (renewable), State Coordinator for Puntland State 12 months (renewable), State Coordinator for 
Hirshabelle State 12 months (renewable), Communication specialist for 36 months (renewable), International 
Project Management Support expert for 36 months (renewable). 
 
24. 
Procurement Implementation Arrangements. Implementation will be by the MFBE of the Federal Government of 
Somalia which will serve as the main implementing agency at the Federal level. The Ministry has limited procurement 
capacity and previous experience with World Bank financed operations. To mitigate the risk, a Project Management Unit 
(PMU) will be established and housed within MFBE. PMU capacity will be strengthened by recruiting consultants including 
a Project Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, Procurement Specialist among others. The PMU will be 
responsible for project implementation including procurement implementation, management, and oversight. In the 
proposed arrangements, the Project Procurement Specialist in the PMU will work alongside the relevant government staff 
in the MFBE for knowledge and skills transfer to enable them to gradually take over the project's activities. In this regard, 
MFBE will nominate procurement personnel (counterpart staff) for skill transfer during the Project implementation. Also, 
the implementing agency procurement capacity will be enhanced through on-the job training, HEIS and mentoring by the 
World Bank’s Procurement Team during the Project implementation. In addition, designated procurement staff will be 
encouraged to register and undertake professional procurement courses. Project Implementation Units (PIUs), established 
in the FMS Ministry of Fisheries, will be led by a State Project Coordinator (SPC) with dual reporting lines to the Project 
Coordinator and the DG of the respective FMS fisheries ministries. The PIU and FMS Ministries of fisheries will be 
responsible for the coordination and implementation of project activities in FMS, in fishing communities, and will be 
involved in procurement activities.   
  
25. 
Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment. The procurement capacity assessment was conducted at MFBE, the 
implementing agency. The objectives of the assessment were: (a) to evaluate the management capability of the 
implementing agency to effectively carry out the procurement processes; (b) assess the adequacy of the systems that are 
in place to administer procurement; (c) assess the quality and effectiveness of the Procurement arrangements when 
putting Procurement procedures into practice; (d) assess the procurement process and market readiness; (e) to develop 
an action plan to be implemented as part of the Project in order to address the deficiencies detected by the assessment 
aimed at minimizing the risks identified; and (f) to propose procurement supervision plans for the Bank considering the 
relative strengths and weaknesses and risks revealed by the assessment. The assessment found that (i) that the 
Implementing Agency does not have previous experience with World Bank financed operations (ii) the national 
procurement law is not fully operational; (iii) weak capacity of bidders/suppliers – bidders are not familiar with bidding 
procedures of public procurement. Thus, sometimes bids submitted are of poor quality and with unintentional deficiencies 
that end up being rejected; (iv) inadequate experience in contract management; (v) this being a fragile environment, the 
market is unstable and sometimes suffers from limited interest from international contractors/consultants or high price 
bids/proposals because of country security risk and this sometimes leads to low response to published tenders and also 
the market is impacted by fraud and corruption risk (including collusion and outside interference in contracting process; 
and (vi) lack of adequate complaint handling mechanism (there is no standardized complaint handling system in place 
known to the bidding community to review and resolve complaint/disputes at appropriate stages of the procurement 
cycle; and (vii) weak legal and financial institutions (commercial Banks and Insurance agencies) are not well established.   
  
26. 
Proposed mitigation measures include. (a) establishment of PMU with a dedicated Procurement Specialist with 
relevant and adequate qualifications and experience acceptable to the World Bank and  ensuring that the Project 
Operations Manual (POM) includes a well described procurement management process, (b) training of the project 
implementing agency staff by the World Bank on the Procurement Regulations; (c) on high-risk procurement activities, 
but below prior review threshold, the procurement prior review will be continued with justification, (d) enhance the
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 of 61 
 
oversight and supervision of procurement activities, (e) creating awareness among the government, private sector, and 
other stakeholders on the key issues regarding integrity in procurement and financial management; (f) supporting 
procurement reforms; (g) encourage international firms to have joint ventures with local firms due to insecurity; (h) 
establishment of an effective complaint handling system known to the bidding community to review and resolve 
complaints and (i) the Client may request Hands-on Extended Implementation Support (HEIS) throughout the project 
duration to directly assist project procurement activities for large, complex and high-risk contracts.   
  
27. 
Risk Assessment: Based on the above, the risk for procurement is considered “High.” The risk is reduced to a 
residual rating of “Substantial” in view of the mitigation measures proposed. The World Bank will periodically review the 
risk rating during the implementation of the project and update it appropriately. 
  
28. 
Procurement documents. For international competitive procurement, the government shall use the World Bank’s 
Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs). The SPDs are available on the World Bank external website: 
www.worldbank.org/procurement/standarddocuments. Since the government is in the process of finalizing its own 
Standard Bidding Documents, the project shall use the World Bank’s SPDs customized to national standard and agreed 
with the World Bank when approaching the national market. 
  
29. 
Publication (advertising). The government is required to prepare and submit to the World Bank a General 
Procurement Notice (GPN). The World Bank will arrange for its publication in the United Nations Development Business 
online (UNDB online) and the World Bank’s external website. Specific Procurement Notices (SPNs) for all procurement 
under open international competitive procurement shall be published in at least one newspaper of national circulation in 
the borrower’s country, or in the official gazette, or on a widely used website or electronic portal with free national and 
international access and in the UNDB online.  
  
30. 
Contract management capability and capacity. The PMU will be responsible for overall implementation and 
management of awarded contracts in accordance with the agreed contractual obligations. The project will also rely heavily 
on consulting services to augment technical expertise. However, there is limited experience in developing Terms of 
Reference and managing consulting services of the nature envisaged in the project. Management of contracts will be done 
through the PMU focal persons and technical departments responsible for specific components/sub-component of the 
project. To ensure that quality, cost, and time are not compromised, and contractual provisions are enforced 
appropriately, supervision consultants shall be recruited for all the Works packages. Additionally, staff involved in project 
implementation will continuously attend procurement and contract management training/clinics to enhance their 
capacity. No contract has been identified to be complex and need to have a mandatory Contract Management Plan. 
However, the project will prepare simple contract monitoring sheets for each signed contract for easy monitoring and 
tracking of milestones.
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 of 61 
 
ANNEX 2: Climate Co-Benefits Assessment 
The project actions are in response to the vulnerability and impacts expected on the marine and coastal ecosystems of 
Somalia and the associated fisheries which include:  
• 
Warming and acidification of sea water, storm events, SLR can affect the distribution and local abundance of fish 
stocks due to a) water outside of their oxygen or thermal tolerance (e.g. tuna/large pelagic moving further offshore 
or deeper, coastal stocks moving further South along the East African coast); b) coastal fisheries at risk of lower 
recruitment and productivity and fish community structures (e.g. coral reef fisheries) changes in primary 
productivity and c) habitat loss or damage resulting in reduced stocks productivity and reproduction. There is also 
a risk of invasive species moving in, resulting in competition and/displacement and less fish landed supplying the 
value chains. This increases coastal communities’ vulnerability since they may capture and land less fish due to 
lack of appropriate vessels and technology or knowledge to fish further offshore, deeper, etc. resulting in lower 
incomes and higher food insecurity. Fishers may also lack the knowledge to catch other species which are not yet 
of commercial/ food security interest. Warming, acidification, storm events, and SLR together they risk disruption 
to supplying fish for selected value chains due to biological and ecosystems changes (discussed in Component 2).  
• 
Increasing ambient temperatures impact where a) the running costs of infrastructure refrigeration, ice, cooling 
etc. results in increased GHG emissions and increased operating costs; and b) infrastructure materials 
sustainability is reduced with faster degradation in hotter weather (especially if combined with dust storms). 
These impacts increase operating costs for fishers (e.g. increase in cost of ice) and may increase the risk of a higher 
loss of fish or decreased fish quality resulting in lower incomes. 
• 
Increased storms with greater intensity/frequency and sea level rise (SLR) impact where a) damage to fishing 
infrastructure and vessels affects communities by reducing access to resources leading to lower catches, lower 
incomes, and higher food insecurity. It also increases safety-at-sea risks during fishing and beach landing resulting 
in markets losses and higher food insecurity. In extreme cases, this could lead to displacement of stakeholder; and 
b) damages to post-harvest storing/processing/cold chain facilities results in less fish processed and available in 
markets and possibly higher food loss and waste that risks food insecurity and job losses and consequential 
markets losses and further risks to food insecurity; 
• 
Under all climate change scenarios, species distributions and local abundance will change and fisheries 
management needs to adapt to and mitigate these changes. Effective fisheries management builds healthy fish 
stocks (e.g. biomass, including spawning biomass, above sustainable levels, higher genetic diversity, etc.) 
therefore increasing their resilience, as well as the resilience of the coastal communities depending on these 
stocks, to climate change impacts. Fisheries management is the best tool available to adapt and mitigate climate 
change impacts. Where, when and how fishers exploit the resource, which would change overtime due to climate 
change, will be considered in management, including co-management. Decisions along with management 
measures will strengthen resilience of the ecosystem that supports the fisheries as well as resilience within the 
fish populations (stocks). Certain gear, e.g. bottom trawls, disrupt the ecosystem (e.g. trawling damages bottom 
structures and fauna, and suspends sediments in the water column) and reduce biodiversity thus lowering 
ecosystem and stock resilience. Restricting such gears will strengthen resilience and will support both adaptation 
as well as a mitigation (as it reduces fuel use and sediment disruptions). Nature-based solutions such as spatial 
closures of fishing activities (i.e. fish refugia) are used for stocks to recover and be healthier, especially where they 
protect fish in the early stages of their life cycle and build resilience to fishing pressure by allowing more fish to 
mature and spill-over to neighboring areas.
=== PAGE 56 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 61 
 
Table A2.1: Climate adaptation and mitigation measures, by climate subcomponent and value of subcomponent. 
 
40 Literature indicates climate proofing buildings adds from 15% if use concrete frame (more cyclone resistant) rather than a wood one 
(https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/why-hurricane-resistant-homes-arent-constructed-bought-more-
frequently/329268#:~:text=The%20reality%20is%20that%20we,market%20demand%2C%E2%80%9D%20he%20said. To double the cost and an 
additional 15% running costs (https://www.bigrentz.com/blog/hurricane-proof-buildings) 
41 Simad University. Rising Tides: How Climate Change Threatens Somalia’s Coastlines (https://ice.simad.edu.so/2023/12/30/rising-tides-how-
climate-change-threatens-somalias-coastlin/#:~:text=In%20addition%20to%20their%20many,are%20exacerbated%20by%20climate%20change) 
42 Atlas Molded Products - Everything You Need to Know About Cold Storage Insulation ( https://www.atlasmoldedproducts.com/blog/cold-
storage-insulation#:~:text=For%20example%2C%20if%20the%20facility,value%20of%2045%20is%20needed). 
43 Previous experience shows that the cost of supplying renewable energy to the proposed infrastructures (e.g. solar panels for cold-store) can cost 
up to 50% of the overall infrastructure cost. 
44 the project will allocate 25% of costs for energy efficient materials (e.g. windows where double pane energy efficient windows are twice the price 
of single pane (https://www.forbes.com/home-improvement/windows/double-pane-window-cost/) 
45 currently in Somalia there are no energy certification standards or regulations requiring star rated equipment and all equipment will be imported, 
the equipment procurement will include meeting star ratings from other countries as appropriate. 
 
Project actions to reduce vulnerability and build resilience 
Project Components 
Subcomponents/Activities 
CC adaptation to reduce vulnerability 
CC mitigation 
1.1 Climate-resilient fisheries 
infrastructure 
a) Identify viable options for 
climate-resilient small-scale 
fisheries infrastructure at 
selected sites 
b) Prep studies for climate-resilient 
small-scale fisheries 
infrastructure 
c) Construction of infrastructure 
including mitigation and 
adaptation materials and 
equipment 
d) Operation of infrastructure 
including maintenance of NBS 
and lower GHG emitting 
equipment  
Selection criteria for the climate-resilient 
infrastructure include adaptation considerations 
such as siting of structures, appropriate materials40 
(e.g. above 1-in-100-year flooding or above buffer 
zone for cyclone resistance), use of NBS (e.g. tree 
planting to reduce wind impact and reduce solar 
radiation) as well as coastal protection works such 
as dune rehabilitation/planning; 
community resilience by protecting assets (e.g. 
boats, engines, fishing gear, etc.)  and a safe-haven 
during storms where homes are vulnerable to storm 
damage41.  
 
Capacity building for beneficiaries will also include 
climate change awareness and means to adapt to 
impacts. 
Design of infrastructure will include 
latest low energy and low GHG 
technologies (Lower Global 
Warming Potential (GWP) and 
Montreal Protocol compliant 
technologies (e.g. solar lighting, 
solar powered cold-store and ice-
machine, cold-store insulation, with 
R rating of 30 for roof and 45 for 
walls/roof42,43); materials (e.g. 
windows, insulation) used in 
construction will also be 44 energy 
efficient and  appropriate for local 
conditions such as at project sites;  
→CCB eligible: 9.1: Energy 
efficiency, on-site, renewable 
energy, CO2 emission reduction, 
and carbon sinks in buildings. 
Equipment in the buildings will be 
certified for energy efficiency (e.g. 
EnergyStar)45 
→CCB eligible: 9.5: New or 
replacement standalone energy 
efficient appliances or equipment
=== PAGE 57 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 of 61 
 
 
46 Literature search indicates up to 47% reduction in energy demand in residential setting, but depends on where trees planted and species used 
(United States Environmental Protection Agency. Lower Building Energy Demands, https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure/lower-building-
energy-demands). 
Use of NBS, (e.g. tree planting to 
help with reduce ambient 
temperature46, and sand-dams for 
the provision of fresh water around 
infrastructure especially related to 
cold chain, processing and retailing/ 
marketing) 
→ CB eligible: 9.1: Energy 
efficiency, on-site, renewable 
energy, CO2 emission reduction, and 
carbon sinks in buildings. 
 
Training of beneficiaries to include 
best practices in low-carbon 
facilities operation and 
maintenance, use of the GHG 
reduction technologies and NBS  
→CCB eligible: 12.13 Capacity 
building and information 
dissemination. 
1.2 Improve fishing, handling, 
processing, and marketing 
techniques to enhance quality 
and value-addition 
a) Identify priority value chains 
b) Climate-informed value chain 
analysis and improvement plans  
c) Implementation of value chain 
improvement plans 
d) Advisory services to private 
sector 
e) Organizing fishing communities 
f) 
improvement of safety-at-sea 
g) Communication/Awareness 
Capacity building/training to improve economic 
benefit from fish value chains that include improved 
energy efficient handling/practices, equipment, 
packaging, new markets, and other measures that 
can adapt to fish supply disruptions due to climate 
change impacts (e.g. storms or long-term 
distribution changes so that supply for processing is 
consistent). Capacity building will include i) 
identifying options and encouraging stakeholders to 
access diverse sources as well as species for supply 
and markets for products and ii) managing finances 
for disruptions in production. Capacity building to 
improve product and diversify products will increase 
revenues in the sector, build economic resilience 
and contribute to economic resilience of coastal 
communities without necessarily reducing fish 
stocks. Fishing and fish processing are often part of 
a multi-sectoral livelihood and food security 
strategy, so that when climate change impacts crops 
and other food production systems, fisheries are still 
productive. Provision of equipment, e.g. 
refrigerated/insulated vehicles, will reduce food loss 
and support fish products transport to greater 
distances for improved food and nutrition security.  
 
The training and capacity building 
activities (activities c to g) will 
include climate change awareness 
and best fishing and handling 
practices, including operations to 
reduce fuel consumption and fish 
loss (activities c to f) → CCB eligible: 
12.13 Capacity building and 
information dissemination.  
 
This subcomponent includes 
upgrading or introduction of Lower 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
and Montreal Protocol compliant 
technologies (e.g. cooling) and 
equipment (e.g. food processors) to 
reduce GHG emissions (activity c). 
Where possible, the equipment will 
be powered by renewable energy 
sources (e.g. solar) and use NBS (as 
noted above in 1.1.) to further 
reduce energy demands. The 
delivery of equipment such as fish 
drying racks, solar fridges will be 
complimented by TA to effectively 
use/maintain it. These measures
=== PAGE 58 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 of 61 
 
 
47 Fishermen along the coast of Somalia traditionally use local forestry material to build the hulls of their houris (dhows), this contributes to 
denuding a significant number of trees from dwindling indigenous hardwood forests. The project will raise awareness among the fishing 
communities of the benefits of transitioning to climate-smart fiberglass hulls for artisanal fishing vessels to reduce the destruction of natural stands 
of indigenous coastal hardwood forests. Larger fiberglass boats are already manufactured in Somalia, last longer than wooden houris further 
reducing the demand for harvesting the trees, and are safer to operate. The Somalia Fisheries Master Plan (2023) estimates there are 
approximately 100,000 vessels of which 20% are houris. 
48 FAO estimated 3.6 Gt CO2e emitted from Food Loss & Waste in 2007 (FAO, 2014. Food wastage footprint & Climate Change - 
https://www.fao.org/3/bb144e/bb144e.pdf) of which seafood loss/waste accounted for 5%, i.e. 0.18 Gt CO2e). Marine fish production in 2007 was 
80 Mt in 2007 (FAO Statistics), with 35% food loss and waste globally (FAO, 2022. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2022), i.e. 28 Mt in 
2007). With an estimated production of fish of 30,000 t per year in Somalia (FAO Statistics, https://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics-
query/en/capture/capture_quantity), and based on an estimated domestic food loss and waste between 25-40%, emission from fish loss and waste 
would be between 48,000 to 77,000 t of CO2e. 
49 FAO Technologies and Practices for Small Agricultural Producers - Construction of raised drying racks for fish? The experience from Burundi 
(https://www.doc-developpement-durable.org/file/Elevages/aquaculture&peche&pisciculture/sechoirs/TECA%20-
%20Construction%20of%20raised%20drying%20racks%20for%20fish%20–%20the%20experience%20from%20Burundi%20-%202014-12-12.pdf) 
Drying racks are likely interventions in this project. 
50 The High-Level Panel Oceans (HLP) noted that reduction in fuel use intensity from rebuilding depleted wild stocks has the potential to mitigate 
0.24–0.92 Gt/year of CO2e by 2030. In the case of Somalia, this component has the potential to prevent CO2e from entering the atmosphere - FAO 
estimates world marine fish production is 78.8 Mt in 2020, and 34% was overfished (or 26.86 Mt). Using HLP mid-point of .58 Gt, not overfishing a 
Mt of fish has potential to mitigate 0.021 Gt annually. With a fishery production potential estimated at 0.6 Mt, preventing overfishing through 
effective management would prevent emission of 13.2 MtCO2e/year. (https://oceanpanel.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Full-Report_Ocean-
Climate-Solutions-Update-1.pdf) 
Training on safety-at-sea will reduce risks against 
weather events exacerbated by climate change (e.g. 
storms); disaster risk planning will reduce risks and 
increase preparedness against storms/flooding and 
other climate related events. This includes raising 
awareness on and encouraging the transitioning 
from timber to fiber glass for small fishing vessels 
which reduces the use of wood and tree cutting 
while also being safter in storm conditions that are 
exacerbated by climate change.47 
 
 
will reduce fish loss and waste and 
ultimately reduce decomposing fish 
which emit GHG. For Somalia, GHG 
emissions linked to Fish Loss and 
waste could be around 67,500 and 
96,430 t of CO2e annually48. For 
example, drying rack can halve the 
losses in fish processing.49 
→ CCB eligible: 9.5: End-use energy 
efficiency; 5.9 reduce food losses or 
waste or promote lower-carbon diets; 
12.10 TA to deploy low carbon 
technologies and measures. 
Equipment will be energy 
starred/certified where possible 
→CCB eligible: 9.5: New or 
replacement standalone energy 
efficient appliances or equipment 
 
2.1:  Laying a foundation for 
effective, transparent, and equitable 
fisheries resource governance 
a) FMDC established and 
operational 
b) Strengthen and harmonize legal 
and reg frameworks 
c) 
Develop and implement fisheries 
management plans 
This subcomponent is intended to ensure better 
governance and management of fisheries and 
providing regulatory frameworks for 
implementation.  
Fisheries management is the most effective tool to 
adapt and mitigate climate change impacts on fish 
stocks. The project will support inclusion of climate 
considerations, including through capacity building 
for fisheries authorities and community 
Improved fisheries management 
will increase resource efficiencies 
including reducing fish waste and 
resulting reduced fish 
decomposition48.  Better fisheries 
management potentially reduces 
emission of 13.2 MtCO2e per year 
from overfishing50. → CCB eligible; 
5.9 reduce food losses or waste or 
promote lower-carbon diets
=== PAGE 59 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 of 61 
 
d) Capacity strengthening of 
fisheries institutions to manage 
fisheries 
e) Strengthening associated public 
institutions for enforcement 
f) 
Co-management pilots 
g) Research  
 
organizations, to build ecosystem and stock 
resilience to climate change. Management plans, 
including co-management, will include management 
measures such as spatial and/or temporal closures, 
size limits, bag limits, gear restrictions, NBS such as 
fish refugia) to adapt and mitigate climate change 
impacts on fish stocks, and dependent communities. 
The growth of sustainable fisheries resilient to 
climate change will be strengthened through 
effective management that prevents overfishing. 
It is important that threats, such as overfishing and 
IUU fishing, to fish stock already stressed by other 
climate change impacts such as elevated sea 
temperatures, are prevented. This will build54 
resilience of the fish supplies to climate impacts and 
help to ensure the combined threats do not lead to 
the “tipping point” noted above (see para 8 page 
10). 
 
Training in this subcomponent will include 
awareness raising on climate change impacts and 
relevant adaptation measures for management in 
the fisheries sector. This includes raising awareness 
among small-scale fishers on transitioning from 
timber to safer fiberglass boats, which have less risk 
of storm damage exacerbated by climate change 
and using less fuel and cheaper to maintain.  
  
 
This subcomponent includes 
rehabilitating fisheries public 
institutional infrastructure including 
climate smart buildings and energy 
efficiency certified equipment (e.g. 
Energy Star) as well solar powered 
buildings (sub-activity d and f) 
which will incorporate energy 
efficient, Lower Global Warming 
Potential (GWP) and Montreal 
Protocol compliant materials and 
technologies as described in 1.1.140. 
→ CCB eligible: 9.1: Energy 
efficiency, on-site, renewable 
energy, CO2 emission reduction, 
and carbon sinks in buildings. 
 
This component also includes 
providing capacity building and 
training on GHG emissions and their 
reduction and TA to the private 
sector and community groups for 
an improved understanding of 
impacts of climate change and ways 
to mitigate impacts including 
reducing GHG emissions by 
transitioning to more fuel-efficient 
technologies (e.g. engines), 
equipment and practices  
→ CCB eligible: 12.13 Capacity 
building and information 
dissemination; 12.10 TA to deploy low 
carbon technologies and measures. 
Equipment in the buildings will be 
certified for energy efficiency  (e.g. 
energy star) (2.1(d and f) where 
feasible. 
→CCB eligible: 9.5: New or 
replacement standalone 
energy efficient 
appliances or equipment 
 
2.2. Developing a comprehensive 
Monitoring Control and Surveillance 
(MCS) system to fight IUU fishing in 
Somali waters 
a) development and implementation 
of a National Plan of Action  
b) Enhance Fisheries Monitoring 
Warmer water due to climate change results in fish 
shifting to different areas, including illegal ones or 
into areas of different jurisdiction, that some fishers 
may access. The proposed MCS system and 
information centers are part of the strategy to build 
long-term climate resilience of fish stock and marine 
ecosystems. MCS is key to managing the threats of 
Effective MCS is key to supporting 
mitigation efforts by ensuring more 
fish are available in domestic 
markets and when combined with 
shifting diets to ocean-based 
proteins (Component 1.2 
developing new markets), this can
=== PAGE 60 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 of 61 
 
 
51 S. Widjaja, T. Long, H. Wirajuda, et al. 2020. Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing and Associated Drivers. Washington, DC: World 
Resources Institute (https://oceanpanel.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Illegal-Unreported-and-Unregulated-Fishing-and-Associated-
Drivers.pdf). 
52 Hoegh-Guldberg, O. 2019. The Ocean as a Solution to Climate Change: Five Opportunities for Action. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute; 
https://oceanpanel.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Full-Report_Ocean-Climate-Solutions-Update-1.pdf 
53Clark and Tilman, 2017. Comparative analysis of environmental impacts of agricultural production systems, agricultural input efficiency, and food 
choice. (https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aa6cd5/meta) 
Center 
c) Capacity building of offshore 
patrols 
 
IUU fishing and for ensuring management measures 
are complied with as noted in 2.1 above. These 
measures help to keep fish abundance high enough 
to be resilient to climate change impacts and to 
avoid combined threats reaching a tipping point for 
the fisheries (see para 8. Page 10). It will inform 
management plans as well through awareness 
raising and communication improve compliance and 
consequently building fishers adaptation capacities 
to climate driven changes in fisheries.  
result in mitigation potential of 
0.24–0.84 Gt of CO2e per year in 
203051,52 
→CCB eligible; 5.9 reduce food losses 
or waste or promote lower-carbon 
diets. 
 
Effective MCS operations will 
reduce illegal bottom trawling in 
Somalia, a fishing practices highly 
energy intensive (bottom trawling 
use more fuel than other fishing 
practices (2.8 times on average53) 
and highly degrade marine habitats. 
Eliminating illegal bottom trawling 
reduces fuel use and CO2e 
emissions by the fishing fleet 
operating in. In addition reduces in 
GHG emissions since trawling, 
which degrades the sea floor, 
releasing carbon and hampering its 
storage in marine sediments. 
Elimination of trawling activities 
will increase carbon storage in 
marine sediments. 
→ CCB eligible: 5.9  Projects that 
reduce  food losses or waste or 
promote lower carbon diets 
5.7 Projects that reduce GHG 
emissions from the degradation of 
marine ecosystems or other water-
based ecosystems 
5.8 Projects that reduce CO2e 
intensity in fisheries or aquaculture. 
2.4 Strategic studies on fisheries 
development and blue economy 
Studies will include the impact of climate change on 
fisheries and fish distributions in Somalia waters, as 
well as the economic and political implications for 
the sector in light of changing fish distributions and 
abundances and how to best adapt to these 
impeding impacts 
Studies on lower carbon and energy 
efficient fishing technologies, 
equipment and practices will 
enable decision makers and 
communities to better understand 
the potential management 
measures to take to mitigate to 
climate change impacts in the 
fisheries sector → CCB eligible:
=== PAGE 61 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 of 61 
 
 
12.13 Capacity building and 
information dissemination;
=== PAGE 62 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 of 61 
 
ANNEX 3: Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
Quantifiable Benefits 
1. 
Investing in the fisheries sector has a positive net present value of US$184.3 million and IRR of 82 percent when 
income from licenses and value from fish exports are included. The benefits associated with the project can largely be 
categorized as (a) income from licenses (b) increase in the value fish exports (c) attraction of private investments to the 
fisheries sub-sector and (d) improvement in the livelihoods of the Somalia fishers, fish workers and their communities, as 
well as entrepreneurs. Due to lack of data, only benefits from (a) and (b) are included. 
  
Assumptions  
1) The benefits are calculated for a period of 10 years assuming that the infrastructure in place has a full- life of 10 
years. 
2) The discount rate is 15 percent. 
3) Income from licenses grows at an average annual rate of 47 percent54. 
4) Fish exported from Somalia to the rest of the world55 was obtained from Trademap and an annual growth rate of 
7 percent was obtained from the years 2020-2022. 
  
Table A3.1: Cost Benefit Analysis 
  
  
Benefits - License fee at 3.7% of resource 
rent (USD) 
Fish Exports from Somalia to the world using mirror 
data (USD) 
Total Benefits 
(USD)  
0 
2023 
  
  
               
(55,000,000) 
1 
2024 
                               2,269  
                 41,557,730  
                 
41,559,999  
2 
2025 
                               3,344  
                 44,466,771  
                 
44,470,116  
3 
2026 
                               4,929  
                 47,579,445  
                 
47,584,374  
4 
2027 
                               7,263  
                 50,910,006  
                 
50,917,270  
5 
2028 
                            10,704  
                 54,473,707  
                 
54,484,411  
6 
2029 
                            15,774  
                 58,286,866  
                 
58,302,640  
7 
2030 
                            23,246  
                 62,366,947  
                 
62,390,193  
8 
2031 
                            34,258  
                 66,732,633  
                 
66,766,891  
9 
2032 
                            50,485  
                 71,403,917  
                 
71,454,402  
10 
2033 
                            74,399  
                 76,402,192  
                 
76,476,590  
 
 NPV @ 15%     
  
184,309,047 
  
IRR 82% 
  
  
  
 
54 Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources (2021) “Somalia Longline Tuna Fishery Catch, Effort and Resource Rent” Report 
55 HS Code 03: Fish and crustaceans, mollusks and other aquatic invertebrates
=== PAGE 63 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 of 61 
 
 
2. 
Sensitivity analysis further shows that an increase in resource rent from 3.7 percent to 10 percent will increase 
the net present value to US$519.5 million. 
Non-quantifiable benefits 
 
3. 
Somalia has a very long coastline of approximately 3,300 km, which presents a good business to increase fishing 
business opportunities with the increased support from the World Bank. Currently, the fishing industry contributes 
approximately 2 percent of the country’s total GDP, with only 0.3 percent of the entire Somali population dependent on 
fishing as their principal livelihood. At present, the annual production of fisheries ranges between 25,000-30,000 metric 
tons per year. The opportunity by the Bank to capitalize the sector through provision of infrastructure. The construction 
of facilities such as cold storage and accompanying infrastructure will ensure that the production of fish in the Somalia 
increases which will in turn increase the sector’s contribution to GDP. 
  
4. 
Preliminary investment in the Mogadishu fishing port through carrying out pre-feasibility and social, 
environmental, and economic assessments provides an opportunity for future investors.  Feasibility studies, technical 
designs and economic assessments have the advantage of providing potential investors with investment opportunities in 
the sector. Secondly, investment in infrastructure to support selected sites constructing (e.g. cold store) and equipping 
(e.g. ice plant) of infrastructure, provision of supervision support for the identified works and capacity building for 
operating and maintaining the infrastructure, will attract investors who will either use the existing infrastructure or even 
improve them for greater output production.   
  
5. 
Improved governance and management of Somali marine fisheries and blue economy provides a series of 
qualitative benefits that will ensure small scale and Somali-flagged vessels gain from the fishing sector. The New 
Fisheries Law passed in 2023 divides the fishing grounds into three zones: 0-12nm (Small scale fishers), 12-24 nm (Somali-
Flagged and owned vessels) and 24-200 nm (Foreign vessels), this zoning, will reduce the incidence of Illegal, Unreported 
and Illegal (IUU) fishing by industrial trawlers which has negative effects on the marine habitats and also compete with 
artisanal and small-scale fisher folks who therefore unable to fish due to lack of equipment compared to those of foreign 
vessels. Secondly, capacity building in Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) to track licensed vessels through satellite devices 
will result in reduced IUU fishing, and this in turn would reduce ‘leakages’ in the economy from revenue lost due to illegal 
fishing without license in Somalia. Continued technical support to the Fisheries Monitoring Center (FMC) at the Ministry 
of Fisheries and Blue Economy of the FGS, will ensure proper tracking of fishing activities in the Somali waters, thus 
reducing IUU, as well as exports to other countries resulting in proper reporting. Lastly, the support of the implementation 
of a national harmonized and decentralized collection of fish catches statistics and other data for fisheries by FGS and FMS 
ministries as well as the development of national system of registering fishers and vessels that will facilitate access to 
information for effective fishery management will ensure provision of timely fishery-related advice for effective decision-
making. It will further enable transparency, which will attract investments in the sector. 
  
6. 
The effective management of marine resources through ecosystem the environmental and social management 
framework (ESMF) will ensure the conservation of marine resources sustainability and the resilience of related 
ecosystems. The initial project activities such as construction of small-scale fisheries infrastructure is likely to have an 
initial negative impact of causing erosion, traffic disturbance and water quality degradation.  However, the 
implementation of the environmental and social risks management framework is expected to mitigate the challenges that 
are likely to arise. This framework will include the capacity building of all implementing agencies on the ESMF and inclusion 
of local fishing communities in the development of marine resources management arrangements, to ensure resilience and 
sustainability.
=== PAGE 64 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 of 61 
 
7. 
A gender responsive support to small-scale fishing entrepreneur through the development of infrastructure is 
expected to empower women and therefore supporting SDG 5 (Improving Gender Equality).  Gender equality and 
women empowerment remains a major challenge in Somalia, and according to UNDP Somalia56, the country has a score 
of 0.776 (a maximum score of 1 denotes complete inequality) and ranks 4th last.  Women still face barriers related to 
access to education, employment and political participation, which are key ingredients for women empowerment. Very 
few women are engaged in the private sector and particularly in the fisheries sub-sector. Most recent data indicates that 
women are underrepresented in government and decision-making bodies, for example in women’s representation in the 
House of the people remains low at 24 percent in 2016, despite a commitment quota of 30 percent.  
  
8. 
Even though women of Somalia are currently engaged in selling fish of low-income earning potential, a gendered 
support to small scale fishing entrepreneurs through the construction of infrastructure, such as cold stores, ice-production 
facilities, storage facilities, jetties and markets will result in reduction in post-harvest losses experienced due to lack of 
infrastructure within the fisheries value chain. Capacity building which included financial skills for women to access finance 
and to realize new business opportunities, is important since women tend to lack the financial resources to purchase 
equipment for cold storage that is required in fisheries production, storage and marketing, this limits them to selling fish 
with low-income potential, however, with this project, it is expected that women will gain through increased participation 
in the fisheries sector and also trading in high value fish products.  
  
9. 
The provision of technical support to MFBE (FGS) to strengthen its capacity to manage, implement, and monitor 
project activities, is expected to increase the project absorption capacity. Effective and efficient planning and 
coordination of the project activities will ensure the successful implementation of the project, to reduce the risks 
associated with delayed utilization of funds and low absorption rates. Some of the key inputs from the project that will 
ensure increased project absorption include the recruitment of staff and operationalization of project management unit 
(PMU), establishing adequate financial and procurement management systems and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
The development of well-informed social safeguard instruments and grievance redress mechanism are expected to ensure 
a smooth flow of project implementation with minimal interruptions at the community level where implementation of 
infrastructure activities takes place. In addition, the implementation of the project through the Ministry Fisheries limits 
the bureaucracy associated with multi agency decision-making and implementation framework, having a PMU in 
Mogadishu and small project implementation unit in each state with fiduciary responsibility at the FGS level will reduce 
bottlenecks and slowing down of project implementation. 
 
 
 
56  https://www.undp.org/somalia/genderequality
=== PAGE 65 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 of 61 
 
ANNEX 4: Provisional median/equidistance line between Somali and Yemen 
 
UNCLOS (Articles 15 & 74) specifies the use of median/equidistance lines to separate neighboring coastal States where no 
established maritime boundary exists. They denote a provisional maritime division and would not prejudice the rights of 
a coastal State in negotiating its maritime limits. Currently, Somalia and the Republic of Yemen do not share a legally 
established maritime boundary, hence the use of a provisional equidistance line between the two. 
 
This Annex includes the coordinates of a provisional equidistance boundary, calculated based on contributing points from 
coastlines of each party. NGA Prototype Global Shoreline was used as input coastline data for processing in Caris Limits 
and Boundaries module, the UN-recognized software for spatial analyses related to UNCLOS. 
 
Table A4.1 coordinates for Somalia EEZ 
 
Point 
Long_DD 
Lat_DD 
Long_DMS 
Lat_DMS 
1 
54.44289975 
8.95154094 
54° 26’ 34.439”” E 
8° 57’ 5.547”” N 
2 
53.98127418 
9.46598454 
53° 58’ 52.587”” E 
9° 27’ 57.544”” N 
3 
53.91191954 
9.54336672 
53° 54’ 42.910”” E 
9° 32’ 36.120”” N 
4 
53.11354137 
10.43657685 
53° 6’ 48.749”” E 
10° 26’ 11.677”” N 
5 
53.11305736 
10.43711650 
53° 6’ 47.007”” E 
10° 26’ 13.619”” N 
6 
53.08580361 
10.46750848 
53° 5’ 8.893”” E 
10° 28’ 3.031”” N 
7 
53.04996168 
10.50651270 
53° 2’ 59.862”” E 
10° 30’ 23.446”” N 
8 
53.04667942 
10.50966409 
53° 2’ 48.046”” E 
10° 30’ 34.791”” N 
9 
52.66268736 
10.87754100 
52° 39’ 45.674”” E 
10° 52’ 39.148”” N 
10 
52.48900348 
10.97333402 
52° 29’ 20.413”” E 
10° 58’ 24.002”” N 
11 
52.47436818 
10.98136756 
52° 28’ 27.725”” E 
10° 58’ 52.923”” N 
12 
52.35328118 
11.04456895 
52° 21’ 11.812”” E 
11° 2’ 40.448”” N 
13 
52.30653795 
11.06823407 
52° 18’ 23.537”” E 
11° 4’ 5.643”” N 
14 
52.29103819 
11.07643743 
52° 17’ 27.737”” E 
11° 4’ 35.175”” N 
15 
52.24216694 
11.10226479 
52° 14’ 31.801”” E 
11° 6’ 8.153”” N 
16 
52.20650689 
11.14081426 
52° 12’ 23.425”” E 
11° 8’ 26.931”” N 
17 
52.11923606 
11.23524012 
52° 7’ 9.250”” E 
11° 14’ 6.864”” N 
18 
52.06607370 
11.28967973 
52° 3’ 57.865”” E 
11° 17’ 22.847”” N 
19 
52.05953710 
11.29632571 
52° 3’ 34.334”” E 
11° 17’ 46.773”” N 
20 
52.02561608 
11.36337794 
52° 1’ 32.218”” E 
11° 21’ 48.161”” N 
21 
51.96434542 
11.48580012 
51° 57’ 51.644”” E 
11° 29’ 8.880”” N 
22 
51.93943261 
11.52929646 
51° 56’ 21.957”” E 
11° 31’ 45.467”” N 
23 
51.92479555 
11.55457713 
51° 55’ 29.264”” E 
11° 33’ 16.478”” N 
24 
51.90245707 
11.59284067 
51° 54’ 8.845”” E 
11° 35’ 34.226”” N 
25 
51.89059978 
11.61112748 
51° 53’ 26.159”” E 
11° 36’ 40.059”” N 
26 
51.86112372 
11.66933534 
51° 51’ 40.045”” E 
11° 40’ 9.607”” N 
27 
51.81192631 
11.76931196 
51° 48’ 42.935”” E 
11° 46’ 9.523”” N 
28 
51.81074409 
11.77172107 
51° 48’ 38.679”” E 
11° 46’ 18.196”” N 
29 
51.77767774 
11.83372814 
51° 46’ 39.640”” E 
11° 50’ 1.421”” N 
30 
51.74567987 
11.89488735 
51° 44’ 44.448”” E 
11° 53’ 41.594”” N 
31 
51.70060133 
11.98142034 
51° 42’ 2.165”” E 
11° 58’ 53.113”” N 
32 
51.69318564 
11.99554881 
51° 41’ 35.468”” E 
11° 59’ 43.976”” N 
33 
51.68977168 
12.00201310 
51° 41’ 23.178”” E 
12° 0’ 7.247”” N 
34 
51.67770356 
12.02498894 
51° 40’ 39.733”” E 
12° 1’ 29.960”” N 
35 
51.67424205 
12.03158372 
51° 40’ 27.271”” E 
12° 1’ 53.701”” N 
36 
51.59358960 
12.18513619 
51° 35’ 36.923”” E 
12° 11’ 6.490”” N 
37 
51.57095900 
12.22877563 
51° 34’ 15.452”” E 
12° 13’ 43.592”” N 
38 
51.57029952 
12.23005857 
51° 34’ 13.078”” E 
12° 13’ 48.211”” N 
39 
51.55895267 
12.25210111 
51° 33’ 32.230”” E 
12° 15’ 7.564”” N 
40 
51.51575854 
12.33452977 
51° 30’ 56.731”” E 
12° 20’ 4.307”” N 
41 
51.43889725 
12.48276503 
51° 26’ 20.030”” E 
12° 28’ 57.954”” N 
42 
51.39456978 
12.56833809 
51° 23’ 40.451”” E 
12° 34’ 6.017”” N 
43 
51.39414159 
12.56915881 
51° 23’ 38.910”” E 
12° 34’ 8.972”” N 
44 
51.38376257 
12.58357758 
51° 23’ 1.545”” E 
12° 35’ 0.879”” N 
45 
51.30029382 
12.72391704 
51° 18’ 1.058”” E 
12° 43’ 26.101”” N 
46 
51.26315913 
12.80373504 
51° 15’ 47.373”” E 
12° 48’ 13.446”” N 
47 
51.23502509 
12.86608947 
51° 14’ 6.090”” E 
12° 51’ 57.922”” N 
48 
51.21499149 
12.92290628 
51° 12’ 53.969”” E 
12° 55’ 22.463”” N 
49 
51.16740134 
13.05873146 
51° 10’ 2.645”” E 
13° 3’ 31.433”” N 
50 
51.10911660 
13.22340921 
51° 6’ 32.820”” E 
13° 13’ 24.273”” N 
51 
51.03691178 
13.42763843 
51° 2’ 12.882”” E 
13° 25’ 39.498”” N 
52 
51.00428429 
13.51987167 
51° 0’ 15.423”” E 
13° 31’ 11.538”” N
=== PAGE 66 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Sustainable Fisheries Development Project (P178032) 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 of 61 
 
ANNEX 5: Map of Somalia
