=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
Official Use Only 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PADHI01446  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION  
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT  
ON A  
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF  
SDR 56.1 MILLION (US$76.1 MILLION EQUIVALENT)  
FROM THE GLOBAL AND REGIONAL OPPORTUNITIES WINDOW 
 
AND 
 
SDR 61.9 MILLION (US$83.9 MILLION EQUIVALENT)  
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR ACCESS AND JOBS, PHASE 1 
 
AS PHASE 1 OF THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH 
SOMALIA INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR ACCESS AND JOBS PROGRAM 
 
WITH AN OVERALL FINANCING ENVELOPE OF US$500 MILLION EQUIVALENT  
 
April 13, 2026 
 
 
 
Transport Global Practice 
Urban Resilience and Land Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
Official Use Only 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2026) 
 
Currency Unit =    
US$1   = SDR 0.74 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 1 - June 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Ndiame Diop 
Regional Practice Director: Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Division Director: Qimiao Fan 
Practice Manager: Binyam Reja 
Task Team Leaders: Adam Stone Diehl, Nandya Thalyta Yuwono
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
Official Use Only 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ADS-B 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast 
ARFF 
Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting 
ATM 
Air Traffic Management 
BCR 
Benefit-Cost Ratio 
BRA 
Banadir Regional Administration 
CBA 
Cost-Benefit Analysis 
CCDR 
Country Climate and Development Report 
CNS 
Communication, Navigation and Surveillance 
CO2 
Carbon Dioxide 
CRI 
Corporate Results Indicator 
DA 
Designated Account 
DG 
Director General 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFD 
External Assistance Fiduciary Directorate 
EIRR 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
ERA 
Ethiopian Roads Authority 
FCV 
Fragile, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
ICAO 
International Civil Aviation Organization 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
M&E 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
MIGA 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoPWRH 
Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing 
MoTCA 
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation 
MPA 
Multi-phase Programmatic Approach 
NBS 
Nature Based Solutions 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PrDO 
Program Development Objective 
RAP 
Resettlement Action Plan 
SCAA 
Somalia Civil Aviation Authority 
SEA/SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment 
SHIIP 
Somalia – Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integrated Project 
Stairs2Jobs MPA 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs Program
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
Official Use Only 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SURP-II 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase 2 (Nagaad) 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
UN 
United Nations 
VSAT 
Very Small Aperture Terminals
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
i 
 
Official Use Only 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... ii 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1 
A. Country Context ................................................................................................................................ 1 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 1 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................... 2 
D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) .................................................................................... 2 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................... 8 
A. Project Development Objective ........................................................................................................ 8 
B. Project Components ......................................................................................................................... 8 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 10 
D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 11 
E. Lessons Learned .............................................................................................................................. 12 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 12 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................... 12 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ......................................................................... 13 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 13 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 13 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 13 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 21 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 22 
D. Environmental and Social (E&S) ..................................................................................................... 22 
V. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 23 
VI. KEY RISKS ...................................................................................................................... 24 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 26 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................. 37 
ANNEX 2: Project Map ......................................................................................................... 39
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
ii 
 
Official Use Only 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate 
DATASHEET 
BASIC INFORMATION 
Project 
Beneficiary(ies) 
Operation Name 
Somalia, Federal 
Republic of 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 
Operation ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
 
P513127 
Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) 
High 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpaprocessing#doctemplate 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
Expected Program Closing Date 
05-May-2026 
30-Jun-2031 
26-Jun-2036 
Bank/IFC Collaboration 
 
No 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpa#doctemplate 
MPA Program Development Objective 
to increase access to resilient infrastructure, employment, and services for Somalis in targeted areas. 
 
MPA FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
MPA Program Financing Envelope 
500.00
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
iii 
 
Official Use Only 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
to increase access to resilient infrastructure and infrastructure sector jobs, and improve the capacity of select 
institutions. 
Components 
Component Name 
Cost (US$) 
Resilient Infrastructure for Connectivity, Jobs, and Growth  
138,200,000.00 
Institutional Transformation and Human Capacity Building  
5,800,000.00 
Sustainable Operations and Management  
8,500,000.00 
Infrastructure Implementation Coordination and Management 
7,500,000.00 
Organizations 
Borrower/Recipient:  
Federal Republic of Somalia 
Implementing Agency:  
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and 
Housing, Ministry of Finance 
MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions) 
Board Approved MPA Financing Envelope 
0.00 
MPA Program Financing Envelope: 
500.00 
of which Bank Financing (IBRD): 
0.00 
of which Bank Financing (IDA): 
500.00 
of which Other Financing sources: 
0.00 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?  
No 
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)? 
Yes 
 
SUMMARY 
Total Operation Cost 
160.00
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
iv 
 
Official Use Only 
Total Financing 
160.00  
of which IBRD/IDA 
160.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00  
DETAILS 
World Bank Group Financing 
   
International Development Association (IDA) 
160.00 
of which IDA Recommitted 
30.00 
IDA Grant 
160.00 
IDA Resources (US$, Millions) 
  
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
83.90 
0.00 
0.00 
83.90 
Global and Regional 
Opportunities 
Window (GROW) 
0.00 
76.10 
0.00 
0.00 
76.10 
Total 
0.00 
160.00 
0.00 
0.00 
160.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate 
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions) 
WB Fiscal 
Year 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
Annual 
1.00 
20.00 
30.00 
50.00 
40.00 
19.00 
Cumulative 
1.00 
21.00 
51.00 
101.00 
141.00 
160.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate 
PRACTICE AREA(S) 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
v 
 
Official Use Only 
Transport 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
CLIMATE 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫   High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫   Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫   Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫   Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫   Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫   High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫   High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫   High 
9. Other 
⚫   High 
10. Overall 
⚫   High 
Overall MPA Program Risk 
⚫   High 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate 
POLICY COMPLIANCE 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
vi 
 
Official Use Only 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts 
Relevant 
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved 
Traditional Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate 
LEGAL 
Legal Covenants 
Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(a) - Establish, not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain 
throughout the period of Project implementation, a ministerial committee (“Ministerial Committee”): (i) chaired by the 
Minister of Finance, and comprising of high level representatives, including from the MoPWRH, MoTCA, and Office of 
the Prime Minister; and (ii) vested with such powers, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set 
forth in the Project Operations Manual (“Project Operations Manual” or “POM”), as shall be required to provide 
strategic direction for the project. 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(b) - Establish, not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain 
throughout the period of Project implementation, a technical committee (“Technical Committee”): (i) chaired by the DG 
of the Ministry of Finance, and comprising of, inter alia, directors-general of MoTCA and MoPWRH, and representation 
from Federal Member States (where applicable); and (ii) vested with such powers, functions and competencies, 
acceptable to the Association and set forth in the POM, as shall be required to provide technical oversight and day to 
day governance of the Project. 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(d) - Establish not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain 
throughout the period of Project implementation, an MPA Program coordination Unit within MoF (“MoF-PCU”): (i) led
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
vii 
 
Official Use Only 
by a coordinator, and assisted by competent, experienced and qualified staff, including a monitoring & 
evaluation/communications specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, and such other 
specialists as may be required, under terms of reference acceptable to the Association; and (ii) vested with such 
powers, resources, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set forth in the POM, as shall be 
required to coordinate the MPA Program and carry out Part 2(c) and its relevant activities under Part 4 of the Project. 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate 
Conditions 
Type 
Citation 
Description 
Financing Source 
Effectiveness 
Article IV, Section 4.01(a) 
The Recipient has prepared 
and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual (POM) 
in form and substance 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Effectiveness 
Article IV, Section 4.01(b) 
The Recipient has 
designated a Coordinating 
Environmental and Social 
Specialist within the 
Ministry of Public Works, 
Reconstruction, and 
Housing (MoPWRH) with 
qualifications, experience, 
and under terms of 
reference, satisfactory to 
the Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2, Section 
III.B.1(b) 
Under Category (2)(a) 
unless and until the 
Recipient has recruited to 
MoPWRH-PIU, a dedicated 
health and safety expert, 
with experience, 
qualifications and under 
terms of reference 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2, Section 
III.B.1(c) 
Under Category (3)(a) 
unless and until the 
Recipient has established 
MoTCA-PIU, with 
composition and resources 
satisfactory to the 
Association, and has 
recruited to the MoTCA-
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
viii 
 
Official Use Only 
PIU: (i) a coordinator, (ii) 
procurement specialist, (iii) 
environmental, health and 
safety specialist, (iv) social 
specialist, and (v) financial 
management specialist, all 
with qualifications, 
experience, and under 
terms of reference 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2, Section 
III.B.1(d) 
Under Categories (2)(a) and 
(3)(a) unless and until the 
Recipient has prepared, 
consulted upon, and 
disclosed the relevant 
Environmental Social 
Impact Assessments (ESIA) 
and the Environmental and 
Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), in form and 
substance satisfactory to 
the Association 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2, Section 
III.B.1(d) 
For Eligible Expenditures 
under Category (4), until 
and unless the Association 
has notified the Recipient 
that the conditions set 
forth in Section 5.15 (a) of 
the General Conditions 
have been fulfilled 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Schedule 2, Section 
III.B.1(e) 
For Complementary 
Financing for the Cat DDO 
under Category (5), until 
and unless: (i) the Recipient 
has furnished to the 
Association a request to 
reallocate and thereafter 
withdraw all or part of the 
Unwithdrawn Credit 
Balance for the 
Complementary Financing 
for the Cat DDO, and such 
notice specifies the Cat 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
ix 
 
Official Use Only 
DDO Legal Agreement; and 
(ii) the Association has 
accepted said request and 
notified the Recipient 
thereof, and is satisfied, 
based on evidence 
satisfactory to it, that the 
conditions precedent to 
withdrawal of the financing 
provided under the Cat 
DDO Legal Agreement have 
been fulfilled.
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 1
 
Official Use Only 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
A. Country Context 
1. The Federal Republic of Somalia continues to make notable progress in consolidating its federal governance 
system, strengthening public institutions, and fostering the inclusive, private sector-led development critical for job 
creation. Despite these advances, structural constraints persist, including an unfinished political settlement, 
fragmented governance, and high levels of insecurity which continue to weigh on confidence and investment. Private 
sector activity remains concentrated in a few urban centers where basic infrastructure lowers operating costs; yet 
urban poverty remains substantial (46 percent of urban residents live below the national poverty line).1 Somalia’s 
main cities nonetheless represent a key opportunity for resilience and growth: roughly 90 percent of the urban 
population in cities of 20,000 or more is concentrated along six strategic corridors. 
2. The development context remains shaped by high poverty, recurrent shocks, and escalating climate risks. Over 
half of the population live below the poverty line, with food insecurity magnifying their vulnerability with 6.5 million 
people at crisis level food insecurity.2 Climate change impacts including recurrent droughts, floods, extreme heat, and 
rainfall variability are placing mounting pressure on municipal infrastructure and services, contributing to the 
expansion of informal settlements and heightened exposure to floods and droughts. Transport infrastructure is 
particularly vulnerable to flooding, heat stress, and storm events that can disrupt corridor connectivity and aviation 
safety and operations.3 Reflecting these pressures, economic growth has moderated since 2024: real Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) growth slowed to an estimated 3.0 percent in 2025 and is projected at 2.8 percent in 2026, as sharp 
aid cuts, worsening drought conditions, and external spillovers weigh on consumption, rural incomes, and exports. 
Significant risks remain, given uncertainty around aid, climate shocks, security conditions, and global price volatility.4  
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
3. Foundational infrastructure deficits remain a binding constraint to growth, resilience, and construction-led 
recovery within and between cities. Construction is a critical entry point for jobs and post conflict recovery, yet its 
economic impact is constrained by informality, limited scale, and weak firm capabilities, constraints that are 
exacerbated by poor infrastructure.5 Limited road coverage and poor maintenance restrict mobility and market access. 
An ongoing Mogadishu flood risk assessment estimates US$120 million in average annual losses; 61 percent of 
households reporting income losses driven by the inability of workers to reach workplaces, and disruptions to supply 
chains.6 Improved drainage and transport reliability will reduce flood risk, improve reliable access, lower construction 
costs, enable year-round work, and support sustained private sector growth and job creation.  
4. Economic fragmentation extends beyond urban centers to rural urban linkages and regional trade, limiting the 
benefits of agglomeration. Somalia’s 3,300 kilometers coastline and major seaports offer potential as a regional trade 
hub for the Horn of Africa, linking Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East. Yet fragmented logistics networks, security 
constraints, and weak infrastructure continue to drive high transport costs even over short distances, contributing to 
price disparities and limiting market integration. Corridor and urban road investments reduce the cost of moving 
goods from production centers to markets, while drainage and urban infrastructure improvements ensure that 
receiving and distribution points in primary cities remain functional year-round. Air connectivity directly addresses 
 
1 Somalia Poverty and Equity Assessment, based on the Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey (SIHBS) 2022. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
2 Somalia: IPC Acute Food Insecurity and Acute Malnutrition Analysis (January–June 2026). February 24, 2026. ReliefWeb. 
3 World Bank. 2026. Country Climate and Development Report (English). Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.  
4 World Bank. Somalia Macro-Poverty Outlook. October 2025  
5 World Bank (2025). Private Sector in the Federal Republic of Somalia: Composition, Performance, and Constraints to Growth. 
6 Ongoing World Bank Flood Risk Assessment study in Mogadishu and Hargeisa, 2026
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 2
 
Official Use Only 
this constraint by providing reliable access between primary cities and underserved regions. It also protects 
humanitarian logistics capacity while enabling commercial air services on which perishable exports depend. 
5. Addressing spatial and economic fragmentation requires a strategic approach to reducing functional economic 
distances between cities and their hinterlands. The concept of “basins of integration” is central to this strategy - 
geographically connected economic regions, often structured around key transport and trade corridors, where 
multisectoral investments are synchronized to drive agglomeration economies. Developing these basins demands 
coordinated upgrades to road, air transport, energy, and digital connectivity, alongside trade facilitation and 
institutional strengthening. A Horn of Africa infrastructure impact study estimates that such coordinated interventions 
could yield a 12 percent increase in the employment share of services and a 6.3 percent rise in real incomes in 
Somalia.7 Interventions in such basins can also unlock opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), 
microenterprises, and a range of service providers both directly, through transport and logistics, and indirectly, by 
supporting ancillary activities like supply chain management, veterinary services, and finance. 
6. Infrastructure governance and institutional frameworks in the Federal Republic of Somalia are evolving, with 
increasing, though uneven capacity across sectoral ministries and agencies. Overlapping mandates across several 
ministries, including the Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing (MoPWRH), and the Ministry of 
Transport and Civil Aviation (MoTCA), pose hurdles to integrated planning and service delivery. Financial sustainability 
is an ongoing challenge, as infrastructure development relies heavily on donor support, with limited mechanisms for 
maintenance and reinvestment. The potential for revenue generation, particularly in aviation, is strong but hampered 
by insufficient financial autonomy and lack of transparent reinvestment frameworks.  
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
7. Strategic sectoral direction is anchored in the Federal Republic of Somalia’s National Transformation Plan, 
which prioritizes resilient service delivery, inclusive private sector growth, and improved infrastructure quality. The 
proposed program invests in foundational infrastructure while also improving governance, policies and skills 
particularly in the transport, urban and resilience sectors; thus, strategically aligning with the World Bank’s Jobs 
Strategy.8 The Project is consistent with the World Bank Group Somalia Country Partnership Framework FY24-28 
discussed by the Board on February 29, 2024 (Report No: 187254-SO). It implements the recommendations of the 
2025 Somalia Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR), which identifies access to climate resilient 
infrastructure and flood risk management as critical to safeguarding growth and jobs. It is also aligned with the WBG’s 
Refreshed Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV) Strategy, which highlights how investments in foundational 
infrastructure are not just crucial to creating jobs and economic opportunities, but also for reducing FCV risks over 
time.9 By supporting the Government to deliver tangible results to communities, the project will also contribute to 
strengthening the relationship between the state and its citizens, in line with the World Bank’s 2023 Somalia Risk and 
Resilience Assessment recommendations. The program is Paris aligned, integrating adaptation and mitigation 
measures embedded in national climate commitments, including the Nationally Determined Contributions and 
National Adaptation Plan Framework, and addresses binding constraints highlighted in core diagnostics. 
D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
i) Rationale for Using MPA 
8. In Somalia, the MPA brings multiple benefits as compared to a series of standalone projects: 
 
7 Matias Herrera Dappe and Mathilde Lebrand. “Infrastructure and Structural Change in the Horn of Africa”. World Bank. 2021 
8 World Bank Group. (2025). Foundations for growth and jobs (Development Committee Paper No. DC2025-0004). World Bank.  
9 See: https://www.worldbank.org/content/worldbankgroup/consultations/en/detail/wbg-fcv-strat-25-30.html?cq_ck=1770233346123
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 3
 
Official Use Only 
• 
It provides a risk-based approach, enabling adaptive implementation, flexibility, and incremental capacity 
building to manage shocks. It is informed by analytical work on delivering services in highly insecure areas,10 
emphasizing phased, risk informed, and institutionally grounded investments. In Somalia’s fragile and dynamic 
FCV context, the MPA supports iterative scaling, learning across phases, and course correction as risks and 
opportunities evolve while keeping focus on the Program’s outcomes, as laid out in the Theory of Change. 
• 
It is designed to unlock spatial synergies and deliver impact at scale through a coordinated, resilient investment 
program anchored in a learning agenda. The phased approach allows piloting and scaling, demonstrating results 
and building delivery capacity before expansion into more complex basins. Consolidating investments also support 
targeted, conflict-sensitive implementation. 
• 
It sequences public investment to create supportive conditions for the private sector. Investments in regulatory 
frameworks and capacities in infrastructure sectors will enable predictable, long-term and risk informed private 
commitments. Engagement platforms can help signal where private capital can follow public investments, and the 
MPA’s staged structure supports predictability while remaining responsive to emerging opportunities. 
• 
It creates a framework for longer-term planning with clear criteria for subsequent phases while managing 
annual financing cycles and ongoing fundraising needs. Somalia’s uncertain environment manifests itself in the 
current short-term planning cycles and a piecemeal approach to financing. The MPA enables multi-year and multi-
sectoral investments, as well as iterative reforms to strengthen asset sustainability and sector capacity, clarifying 
longer-term actions and financing needs through defined outcomes, metrics, and shared pipeline. 
• 
It leverages the World Bank Group’s experience and convening power to attract other financing. It builds on 
ongoing investments and cross-sector analysis to address bottlenecks, while using existing institutional and 
project arrangements to maximize readiness. It also helps align and potentially crowd in partner financing, 
including bilateral and multilateral development partners, and links with International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) programs. 
ii) Program Results Chain 
9. The Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs Program (Stairs2Jobs MPA) is intended to support 
the high-level objective of increased access to resilient infrastructure, employment and services for Somalis in 
targeted economic basins. It is intended to address key challenges facing the country through a structured and 
iterative approach. The planned 10-year MPA will be structured around three core pillars: 
• 
Pillar 1 – Enabling Resilient Infrastructure for Access to Jobs and Growth. This pillar supports climate- and 
disaster-resilient infrastructure to unlock Somalia’s basins of integration by (i) strengthening key economic nodes 
through resilient investments, improved services, and job creation, and by (ii) connecting these nodes via resilient 
transport links to enhance supply chains, market access, and inclusion in fragile areas. Investments cover basic 
urban services; economic corridors with aligned energy and digital infrastructure and trade facilitation; airport 
and air transport services; and disaster risk management. All investments apply climate-resilient design standards 
to address flooding, extreme heat, and weather variability. The pillar prioritizes targeted, spatially aligned 
investments to build an infrastructure foundation for jobs, informed by regular FCV analysis to manage conflict 
and political economy risks and support effective implementation. 
• 
Pillar 2 – Institutional Transformation and Capacity Building. This pillar will support the Government to 
strengthen governance, support business enabling policies and a predictable regulatory environment, and deliver 
resilient infrastructure for critical institutions. Support will focus on enhancing policy frameworks, regulatory 
systems, and coordination mechanisms across the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), Federal Member States 
(FMS), local governments, and the private sector to ensure infrastructure investments are risk-informed, climate-
 
10 World Bank. Delivering in Highly Insecure Areas in Somalia: Country and Global Lessons to Inform the World Bank’s Engagement. Advisory Services 
and Analytics, March 2025 (Official Use Only).
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 4
 
Official Use Only 
resilient, and aligned across sectors and geographies. Emphasis will be given to establishing and strengthening the 
licensing and regulatory functions needed to increase the availability of highly skilled professionals, such as an 
engineers’ board. This includes supporting capacity building for planning, procurement, and asset management, 
including the integration of disaster risk management and climate resilience considerations.  
• 
Pillar 3 – Sustainable and resilient operations. This pillar will support the development of organizational 
frameworks for the long-term sustainability and resilience of infrastructure assets. Interventions will include (i) 
transparent and sustainable financing mechanisms for key infrastructure sectors (such as overflight revenue, 
airport landing fees, fuel levies, road funds, user fees, and own-source revenue); (ii) models for private sector 
driven sustainable service delivery and the operations and maintenance of infrastructure assets; and (iii) 
transaction advisory services to support major concessions and crowd-in private capital.  
10. The Program is intended to provide benefits to three groups, (i) direct users of improved infrastructure, (ii) 
those who benefit from new or improved jobs, and (iii) those who benefit from the economic growth generated by 
such investments. Direct users include those who drive on improved roads, travel through improved airports and 
airspace, or benefit from improved urban services. The program’s support for job creation includes the significant 
number of construction jobs, as well as the longer-term jobs related to maintenance and operations of assets. It will 
also support upskilling and licensing of key professionals, such as engineers and air navigation services, unlocking 
practitioners of these professions’ ability to find and retain better jobs. Finally, indirect beneficiaries include residents 
of targeted basins who are expected to benefit from the program’s contribution to overall growth and improved 
resilience. By reducing functional economic distances via preventing flood-related disruption in urban cores and more 
reliable intercity connectivity, the Program is expected to expand the effective labor catchment and market reach of 
targeted cities, while enabling sustained private sector activity in areas constrained by infrastructure unreliability. 
Where surface transport remains constrained by security and infrastructure gaps, aviation provides the only reliable 
year-round connectivity between Somalia’s major cities and to regional markets, making improvements a binding 
condition for market access, time-sensitive exports and humanitarian surge capacity.  
11. Figure 1 below describes the Theory of Change (ToC) of the Program. It summarizes the points above, identifying 
the key problems the program is addressing, articulating the causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes, 
as well as highlighting the longer-term outcome to which the program is contributing.   
Figure 1: Stairs2Jobs MPA Theory of Change
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 5
 
Official Use Only 
iii) Program Development Objective 
12. The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to increase access to resilient infrastructure, employment and 
services for Somalis in targeted areas. 
13. Program results indicators include: 
• 
People that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (CRI) 
• 
Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risk (CRI) 
• 
More and better-paid jobs created and enabled (CRI) 
iv) Program Framework 
14. The scope and timing of the future phases will depend on the availability of funding, the evolving FCV risk 
context, and continuous learning. Future MPA phases will be guided by a government-led, transparent, and criteria-
based sectoral and geographic prioritization framework, with a strong emphasis on readiness, as detailed under 
Subcomponent 2.C. The number of phases could be increased or reduced, as required, based on funding availability, 
emerging priorities, and implementation progress across components and activities. 
15. The first phase will prioritize basic access, climate resilience, and resource mobilization, while strengthening 
institutional capacity and establishing the core systems required to accelerate follow on investments. Activities to 
be included in Phase 1 are intended to achieve three interconnected goals: (i) delivering early success to build 
stakeholder buy in, political momentum, and crowd in other financing; (ii) setting a foundation for future investments 
through institutional development and hands-on capacity building, including the integration of climate and disaster 
risk considerations, particularly in the area of flood risk management; and (iii) facilitating reliable, safe, and resilient 
access throughout the country to reduce implementation risks and costs for future phases.  
16. Building on the basic access provided through initial investments, future phases will deliver targeted support 
for the country’s growing economic basins, adopting an integrated and tailored approach to local economic drivers 
and bottlenecks. Subsequent phases will focus on spatially coordinated investments in key sectors. Investments will 
seek to match ambition with feasibility given the dynamic FCV risk context, and incorporate risk informed planning, 
resilient design standards, and, where feasible, nature-based solutions (NBS) to address flooding, drought, and other 
climate induced stresses. The rollout sequence of these phases will be determined by a readiness criterion, considering 
factors such as government priority and state presence, security, clear ownership of land, and the preparedness and 
feasibility of the included investments. To safeguard assets and consolidate development gains, disaster risk 
management and emergency preparedness measures will be mainstreamed across all interventions and phases. 
17. Phase 2 will scale up priority investments initiated under Phase 1, with a focus on those activities which have 
progressed furthest in implementation (i.e. extension of the Mogadishu drainage system, the construction and 
upgrading of urban roads and selected economic corridors, and the improvement of additional airstrips to enhance 
safe, reliable access and strengthen national and regional connectivity).  
18. Phase 3 will replicate successful interventions from previous phases in additional locations. It will prioritize 
reconstruction of national road infrastructure and urban investments within the country, learning from earlier 
interventions as well as the evolving security environment across the different basins. The corridors will be selected 
from a prioritized short list under design through an ongoing project (Somalia Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integrated 
Project -SHIIP, P173119). If institutional capacity building activities have progressed under prior phases, it will support 
further strengthening. 
19. Phase 4 will be the completion phase, with activities primarily concentrated in pillar 3. It will support 
maintenance of critical infrastructure assets and institutionalization of operations and maintenance structures. In 
addition, it will be used to define future infrastructure interventions.
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs Program, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 6
 
Official Use Only 
Table 1: Stairs2Jobs MPA Program Framework 
Phase # 
Operation 
ID 
Sequential or 
Simultaneous 
Phase’s Proposed DO* 
IPF 
or 
PforR 
Estimated 
IBRD 
Amount 
($ million) 
Estimated 
IDA 
Amount 
($ million) 
Estimated 
Other 
Amount 
($ million) 
Estimated 
Approval 
Date 
Estimated 
Environmental 
& Social Risk 
Rating 
1 
P513127 
 Simultaneous 
To increase access to 
resilient infrastructure and 
infrastructure sector jobs, 
and improve the capacity of 
select institutions  
IPF 
0.00 
160.00 
0.00 
5/5/2026 
High 
2 
P515865 
 Simultaneous 
IPF 
0.00 
100.00 
0.00 
FY28 
High 
3 
P515867 
 Simultaneous 
To expand access to 
resilient corridor 
infrastructure and urban 
services, and to improve 
the capacity of relevant 
Ministries and Authorities 
IPF 
0.00 
190.00 
0.00 
FY29 
High 
4 
P515868 
 Simultaneous 
To enhance sustainable  
operations and 
management programs for 
core infrastructure assets  
IPF 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
FY31 
Substantial 
Total 
  
  
  
 
0.00 
500.00 
0.00 
 
 
Total Program Envelope 
500.00 
 
 
Board Approved Financing Envelope 
0.00
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 7
 
Official Use Only 
v) Learning Agenda 
20. Recognizing Somalia’s complex and fragile context, as well as the mixed track record of infrastructure 
development and private sector participation, implementation of the MPA will rely on a robust learning agenda 
focused on four areas: (i) implementation of infrastructure at scale, (ii) iterative institutional development, (iii) 
infrastructure planning and prioritization, and (iv) FCV risk mitigation. Addressing them will be supported through 
spatially targeted, locally informed assessments, coordinated through the Livable Cities and Disaster Resilience 
platform (P507709), to strengthen alignment, sequencing, and cross sector coherence in future phases. These areas 
reflect the fundamental challenges that have proven difficult during previous projects, and which are likely to 
potentially present hurdles to achieving the MPA’s Program Development Objective.  The Learning Agenda is further 
developed in Table 2. 
Table 2: Learning Agenda 
Key Learning 
Gaps 
Priority Learning Questions 
Learning Methodology 
Institutional 
Responsibility 
Financing & Phase 
Linkages 
Implementation 
of infrastructure 
at scale 
Which delivery and contracting 
models deliver acceptable cost, 
time, quality, and 
Environmental and Social (E&S) 
outcomes in FCV settings? At 
what point can functions 
transition to civil servants 
without increasing risk? 
Comparative 
scorecards across 
Phase 1 investments; 
structured supervision 
debriefs; piloting 
gradual integration of 
government systems. 
MoPWRH, MoTCA 
(technical); MoF 
MPA Coordination 
Unit (synthesis); 
Technical Steering 
Committee 
(decisions). 
Component 4 and 
embedded 
implementation costs; 
informs delivery models 
and supervision 
approaches for Phase 2. 
Iterative 
institutional 
development 
Which institutional functions 
must be operational before 
asset scale-up? What 
milestones justify transition 
from design to 
operationalization? 
Phase-based 
institutional 
diagnostics; tracking 
legal, staffing, financing 
and early performance 
milestones. 
Sector ministries 
with MoF 
consolidation and 
Steering Committee 
validation. 
Pillar 2 financing; Phase 2 
support conditional on 
Phase 1 institutional 
milestones. 
Infrastructure 
planning and 
prioritization 
Which investments deliver 
highest resilience and jobs 
returns per dollar? Which 
reforms translate into funded 
Operations and maintenance 
(O&M)? 
Economic basin 
diagnostics; criteria-
based prioritization 
framework; ex-post 
validation using Phase 
1 outcomes. 
MoF (Sub-
component 2.C) 
with sector ministry 
inputs. 
Sub-component 2.C and 
Pillars 2–3; directly 
informs Phase 2 
sequencing and 
geographic expansion. 
FCV risk 
mitigation 
Which mitigation measures 
reduce disruption, delays, and 
cost overruns? How should 
readiness criteria adjust as risks 
evolve? 
Periodic FCV risk 
reviews; cross-site 
comparisons; 
integration into 
procurement and 
supervision. 
MoF coordination 
with implementing 
ministries and Bank 
FCV Risk Platform. 
Component 4 supervision 
resources; informs 
geographic sequencing 
and procurement 
approaches in later 
phases.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 8
 
Official Use Only 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
21. The Project Development Objective of the first phase (“the Project”) is “to increase access to resilient 
infrastructure and infrastructure sector jobs, and improve the capacity of select institutions.” 
PDO Level Indicators 
• 
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and 
services (Number, disaggregated by gender and youth)  
• 
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number, disaggregated by gender and youth) 
• 
Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities (Person-Days, disaggregated by gender 
and youth) 
• 
Government staff receiving training in core technical disciplines and receiving required licenses (as applicable) 
(Number) 
B. Project Components 
22. Phase 1 consists of three components aligned with the MPA Pillars, as well as a fourth supporting 
implementation.  Together, these components are designed to deliver early, visible results in high impact locations 
while embedding resilience, preparedness, and institutional strengthening as foundations for subsequent phases.  
Component 1: Resilient Infrastructure for Connectivity, Jobs, and Growth (US$138.2 million)  
23. Sub-Component 1.A: Safe and Resilient Air Access (US$19.5 million) - At international and regional airport hubs 
(Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismayo and Garowe) investments will include (i) airfield ground lighting; (ii) passenger and cargo 
screening equipment; (iii) improved power supply and water supply; (vi) passenger security and baggage screening 
equipment to enable compliance with civil aviation regulations; and (vii) improved Airfield Rescue and Firefighting 
(ARFF) capacity to allow operations to meet international standards. Investments in domestic airports (Galkayo, 
Dhusamareb, Jowhar, Dhobley)11 will improve the resilience of airfield infrastructure to extreme weather conditions 
and improve continuity of commercial and humanitarian operations for emergency response during climate-related 
disruptions, including (i) upgrade or rehabilitation of airstrips, (ii) provision of airfield drainage or swales to redirect 
water and protect airfield assets, (iii) installation or rehabilitation of fencing for perimeter security, (iv) development 
of small terminal or passenger facilitation services with improved power supply and water supply, and (vi) passenger 
security and baggage screening equipment. 
24. Sub-Component 1.B: Resilient Urban Infrastructure (US$68 million) – The subcomponent finances construction 
of approximately 2.87 kilometers of priority main trunk drainage line for Catchment Outfall O16 in Mogadishu to 
address chronic and intensifying urban flooding. Implementation of Catchment O16 is prioritized under Phase 1 due 
to its high impact on reducing recurrent flood risk and related disruptions.  
25. Sub-Component 1.C: Economic Corridors (US$50.7 million) – This subcomponent will finance a key missing link in 
one of the Horn of Africa Initiative corridors, connecting Hargeisa to the Ethiopian border at Ina Guha town. 
 
11 Airstrips selected based on a multicriteria analysis incorporating technical, economic, financial and other factors. The analysis prioritized nine total 
airstrips, with the three included in this phase chosen based on accessibility and readiness for investment. Additional airports will be included in 
future phases of the MPA.  
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 9
 
Official Use Only 
Investments include a 63 kilometers section of roadway and associated facilities, provides a critical link between 
Hargeisa city, through Salahley district center, to the Ethiopian border.  
Component 2: Institutional Transformation and Human Capacity Building (US$5.8 million)  
26. Sub-Component 2.A – Air Transport Capacity Development (US$2.5 million).  This component supports the 
institutional, policy and technical capacities of the relevant institutions, both in the short term and setting a foundation 
for deeper reforms to be carried out throughout the life of the MPA. Activities will include: 
(i) 
Somalia Airports Authority. Preparation of a roadmap for establishing a Somalia Airports Authority, setting 
out: (a) the proposed legal mandate and governance/accountability arrangements; (b) roles and interfaces 
with key sector actors; (c) core operational and staffing requirements and capacity-building needs; (d) a 
phased, time-bound implementation plan; and (e) capacity building for current airport operations. 
(ii) Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation Technical Assistance. Technical assistance supporting the MoTCA in 
strengthening its capacity for oversight of the sector, including (a) preparation of a MoTCA five-year strategic 
plan, (b) design of digital systems architecture to support drivers licensing and vehicle registration, and (c) 
preparation of a civil aviation masterplan. It will also finance targeted training to increase the number of fully 
licensed air traffic controllers, including women. 
27. Sub-Component 2.B – Construction and Engineering Capacity Building (US$1 million) – This subcomponent will 
address short-term capacity constraints while launching deeper reforms to be supported throughout the life of the 
MPA. Activities will include: 
(i) 
Somali engineers’ board. Preparation of a roadmap for establishing an engineers’ board, including (a) a 
baseline needs assessment, (b) benchmarking and peer learning from other similar bodies in the East African 
Community, (c) development of legal and regulatory framework documents, and (d) institutional design and 
operating procedures (including for financial sustainability).  
(ii) Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing Technical Assistance. This sub-component will also 
support key institutional capacity building, such as (a) preparation of an axle-load law and (b) strengthening 
the ministry’s Management Information System (MIS), and (c) preparation of detailed design and E&S 
assessments for a new ministry building (to be financed under a future phase of the MPA). 
28. Sub-Component 2.C – Preparation of Subsequent Phases (US$2.3 million) Led by the MoF, this subcomponent 
will support the planning of future MPA phases clarifying sequencing and design readiness, sharpening spatial and 
sectoral prioritization through transparent criteria, and strengthening investment frameworks. Activities will include: 
(i) 
Basin of integration infrastructure needs assessment. Analytical studies at the basin level, leveraging 
existing national data and platforms to develop a tailored assessment, including: (a) validation of the basin 
extents, (b) mapping of key supply chains and diagnosis of physical and systematic bottlenecks, (c) 
assessment of opportunities to drive sustainable job creation through infrastructure and service 
development, and (d) development of a regional infrastructure implementation plan. As part of this effort, 
the subcomponent will explore the deployment of the World Bank’s Smart Parcel Atlas for Resilient Cities 
(SPARC), to strengthen risk informed spatial analysis, infrastructure prioritization, and investment 
sequencing for subsequent phases.12 
(ii) Integrating Disaster Risk Management. This activity will assess sub-national Emergency Preparedness 
Response systems in Somalia to identify priority investments and strengthen linkages with national 
institutions. It will support refinement and operationalization of the country’s Disaster Risk Financing strategy 
and improve key disaster risk management capacities across selected federal member states and 
 
12  SPARC is a geospatial, parcel-level intelligence service that uses high-resolution satellite imagery, Artificial Intelligence, and global datasets—
combined with local government data—to support land use and infrastructure planning, risk-informed urban development, and investment targeting.
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 10
 
Official Use Only 
municipalities. It will also support investment planning (Public Investment, PPP, asset-based revenue 
generation) for ensuring strategic infrastructure development. 
Component 3: Sustainable Operations and Maintenance (US$8.5 million)  
29. This component will address critical challenges in the ongoing operations of the selected infrastructure sectors, 
including airspace and airport management, resilient infrastructure operations and maintenance budgeting, as well 
as in securing sustainable revenue streams for operations and reinvestment.  
30. Sub-Component 3.A – Investments in air traffic management and sustainable overflight revenue (US$6.5 
million).  The subcomponent contributes to a safer, more efficient, and revenue-generating Flight Information Region. 
Installation of specialized equipment, software and data services will improve airspace management throughout the 
country by providing Mogadishu’s Aden Adde International Airport (AAIA) and select regional/international airports 
with modern communication, navigation and surveillance systems,13 improving the efficiency of both commercial and 
humanitarian flights.  
31. Sub-Component 3.B – Infrastructure Operations and Maintenance (O&M) (US$2 million). This sub-component 
will support the development of improved O&M plans for project-financed drainage infrastructure, roads and airports. 
These plans will factor in the available MoPWRH FGS, FMS, selected cities budget, as well as financing needs for 
maintenance of existing infrastructure assets. For airports, this will include options to leverage aeronautical pricing to 
ensure maintenance of assets and continuation of airport services. For urban drainage, maintenance committees 
composed of community members would be set up for all project supported infrastructure investments, i.e. 
Mogadishu drainage committee, and these committees would be responsible for informing the maintenance needs 
and mobilizing community members for maintenance work as needed. These committees will be trained under the 
Project by the MoPWRH and engineering supervision consultant.  
Component 4: Infrastructure Implementation Coordination and Management (US$7.5 million)  
32. This subcomponent will establish project coordination and implementation mechanisms to facilitate 
coordinated and efficient infrastructure implementation for all phases of the MPA. It is expected to establish a high 
level (and limited) coordination mechanism within the MoF to ensure alignment of all phases, as well as support for 
dedicated Project Implementation Units (PIU) within MoTCA and MoPWRH. It will leverage existing implementation 
structures within the MoPWRH and cities). Finally, noting that this will be the first time the MoTCA has served as an 
implementing entity of a World Bank project, it will support capacity building for project implementation.  
33. In addition, this component will support institutional capacity development for project and contract 
management within the implementing Ministry’s civil service. Phase 1 will support a technical and fiduciary skills 
diagnostic of civil service positions within relevant ministries to prepare a human resource needs assessment, review 
HR policies on job qualifications, develop staff learning programs, and outline a transition roadmap to enable internal 
government staff to implement future MPA phases. Subsequent phases will potentially support a gradual reduction 
of external consultants and an increase in regularized civil servants for project implementation. 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
34. The Project’s direct beneficiaries will include; (i) annual passengers of domestic and international flights in the 
airports/airstrips where the Project is investing in enhanced services and/or infrastructure (approximately 687,500 
persons); (ii) those benefitting from flood risk reduction due to improved urban drainage (66,192 persons); (iii) the 
280,000 users of the improved economic corridor, including passengers in public transport and private cars, as well as 
drivers of long-haul trucks providing international freight services. In total, the project is expected to directly benefit 
 
13 Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast/Very Small Aperture Terminal (ADS-B/VSAT); Automatic Weather Observatory Stations (AWOS), 
Aeronautical Information Management (AIM), and Air Navigation Service investments
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 11
 
Official Use Only 
917 people (of which 459,000 are women and 642,000 are youth). Beneficiaries will also include those benefiting from 
the Project’s capacity building activities, including the MoTCA and Somalia Civil Aviation Authority (SCAA) staff, as well 
as the MoPWRH staff eligible for engineering certification. The Project’s indirect beneficiaries will include passengers 
flying through Somali airspace benefiting from improved safety and security, as well as the 31,000 residents living 
within the catchment of the economic corridor.14 Finally, considering the civil works required, the Project will benefit 
those working jobs in construction, direct jobs in operations and maintenance such as inspection, routine repairs, 
vegetation clearing, track maintenance, signaling or safety system check, runway and facility maintenance, equipment 
servicing, baggage handling, safety and security operations, and emergency preparedness.15  
35. In addition, the Project will have a direct and indirect impact on job creation. Regarding direct jobs, it is 
estimated that the Project will create 600 construction sector jobs during project implementation. Operations and 
maintenance of these assets will create additional employment, such as an estimated 100 new airport operations 
staff, as well as those employed maintaining the economic corridor and trunk drainage. Finally, the Project is expected 
to indirectly generate jobs through induced economic development. Initial calculations estimate the Project will 
generate approximately 31,000 more and better jobs.16  
D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
36. The World Bank has a well-established infrastructure portfolio in the Federal Republic of Somalia and extensive 
experience delivering operations in fragile, conflict-affected and violence-affected FCV context, playing a crucial 
role in convening stakeholders. Lessons from the Bank’s long-standing engagement in Somalia, as well as from 
comparable FCV settings globally, have been systematically incorporated into the design of the MPA, including the 
use of phased scaling, readiness-based selection of investments, adaptive implementation, and enhanced risk 
mitigation measures. The Bank has deep experience in transport and urban infrastructure and governance reforms 
across Africa and has demonstrated capacity to deliver results in highly insecure and access-constrained environments 
through flexible implementation arrangements, third-party monitoring, and digital supervision tools. It has also served 
as a central coordinator, bringing together government stakeholders (FGS, FMS, and city-level agencies) as well as 
United Nations (UN) agencies and private operators to align technical standards, manage risks, and ensure the 
continuity of service delivery. 
37. The MPA provides a platform to synchronize efforts with other development partners, including the African 
Development Bank’s US$77 million in investments in Horn of Africa transport links, the United Kingdom, the European 
Investment Bank, the European Union, Denmark, and Qatar, aligning investments to mobilize finance for global public 
goods and creating an enabling environment for private capital through establishing concrete operations and 
maintenance structures and longer term, sustainable job creation. It also aligns with IFC and MIGA country programs 
to harmonize financing approaches and risk mitigation approaches in a challenging FCV context. With additional 
support through the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (MPF),17 the infrastructure portfolio reflects a phased scaled-up of 
World Bank engagement focusing on more transformative climate smart investments. This partnership approach has 
facilitated the careful assessment of needs, risks, and institutional capacity at different levels of government before 
scaling financing for investments.  
 
14 World Bank Corporate Scorecard methodology for “People that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services” 
15 For future phases, beneficiaries will include both direct, and indirect jobs using accepted World Bank Methodologies including from the Corporate 
Scorecard Indicator Guidance note on More and Better Jobs for Infrastructure and the Somalia Jobs Report. The methodology for this Project, 
including the determination of baselines and multipliers will be developed during Phase 1.  
16 Note that estimates are based on the proposed methodology for the Jobs Corporate Scorecard Indicator, prepared on a pilot basis. For future 
phases, the indicator of ‘more and better jobs’ will be included with targets calculated using accepted World Bank Methodologies including from the 
Corporate Scorecard Indicator Guidance note on More and Better Jobs for Infrastructure and the Somalia Jobs Report.  
17 Includes multiple donors, including Foreign Commonwealth, and Development Office (FCDO), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (Kfw), European 
Union (EU), Danish, among others.
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 12
 
Official Use Only 
E. Lessons Learned 
38. Key lessons leveraged in the design of the MPA, including Phase 1, emphasize: 
• 
Ensuring Somalia’s FCV and political context are integrated in project design. Somalia’s operating environment 
creates unique risks for large-scale infrastructure delivery, including insecurity, disputed territorial control, an 
unfinished political settlement, fragmented governance, and low trust across institutions and levels of 
government. The MPA instrument reflects lessons from operating in this context. 
• 
Designing implementation arrangements that leverage synergies across all levels of government. The Project 
adopts a decentralized model that empowers local authorities where feasible, while maintaining a central 
enabling role in policy, strategy, and regulatory oversight, drawing on experience from Somalia Urban Resilience 
Project Phase II (SURP-II, P170922). Clear implementation of responsibilities to mandated institutions helps build 
lasting capacity in the right places, strengthening legitimacy through visible results. To manage roles and 
ownership, agreements between federal, state, and local authorities will be discussed prior to implementation. 
The Standard Form of Agreement with UN agencies helps manage integrity and Environmental and Social 
Standards compliance risks through output-based deliverables, robust reporting, and stronger accountability, 
supporting supervision in access-constrained settings. 
• 
An iterative and phased approach will be critical to the Project’s success in building institutional capacity. Phase 
1 will assess needs, risks, and capacity at FGS, FMS, and city levels before scaling investments, consistent with 
lessons from FCV and stabilization contexts on the importance of conflict- and access-aware planning. The 
approach supports use of country systems to strengthen accountability and state society relations, while enabling 
data driven decisions for future phases. 
• 
System-wide airport improvements can strengthen regional connectivity and broaden economic benefits. 
Regional experience shows that network improvements reduce reliance on a single facility, improving continuity 
during weather, technical, or security disruptions.18 They connect underserved areas to markets, reduce travel 
times where roads are constrained, and support jobs, local revenues, and investment in secondary cities, making 
air connectivity a practical resilience pathway for the Project. 
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
39. The Project will have three implementing agencies: the MoF, MoTCA, and MoPWRH. Teams from these 
Ministries, jointly as a National MPA Coordination Unit, will be responsible for the overall implementation of all 
activities in the Project. For urban drainage activities, the Banadir Regional Administration (BRA) Project 
Implementation Unit established under SURP-II will be leveraged. The Project will support a gradual move away from 
stand‑alone project structures and enable a transition to greater reliance on civil servants, supported by upfront 
transition planning during Phase 1 to strengthen long-term sustainability and capacity. Detailed implementation 
arrangements are outlined in Annex 1. 
40. Project governance will be led by two committees: a Ministerial Committee and a Technical Steering 
Committee. The Ministerial Committee, chaired by the Minister of Finance and including the Ministers of the MoTCA 
and the MoPWRH, and the State Minister of the Office of the Prime Minister, will meet on a bi-annual basis to review 
the overall MPA program progress and set high level direction for ongoing and future phases. Day-to-day governance 
will be the responsibility of a Technical Steering Committee led by the Director General (DG) of the MoF and consisting 
 
18 For instance, West and Central Africa Air Transport Safety & Security Project (P100785) and Tanzania Transport Integration Project (P165660)
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 13
 
Official Use Only 
of the DGs of the MoTCA and the MoPWRH, as well as representatives from engaged FMS ministries/BRA depending 
on the agenda, which will meet on a quarterly basis, or more often as required. 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
41. Resources allocated under Component 4 support project management activities, including Monitoring & 
Evaluation (M&E). Project outcome and intermediate indicators will be measured using the methodologies outlined 
in the Results Framework. As the MoF will serve as overall coordinator for the Project, they will provide high level 
consolidation and reporting on M&E during the Project implementation cycle. Project information updates and data 
management will be coordinated across relevant departments. Contractors and supervising engineers will provide 
monthly site progress reports to validate work quality and Environmental, Social, Health and Safety compliance. 
Results and compliance assessments will provide feedback loops with government stakeholders and project 
committees, including community consultations and grievance redress at project sites. Semiannual project progress 
reports will be prepared and submitted to the World Bank no later than 45 days after the end of each calendar 
semester. The structure of these reports will be detailed in the Project Operations Manual (POM). In line with the 
experience across other World Bank-financed investments, the Project will benefit from enhanced support for 
capacity building for digital supervision and M&E, including through tools such as the Geo-Enabling initiative for 
Monitoring and Supervision that has been employed across the portfolio. 
C. Sustainability 
42. The air transport sector can generate substantial and sustaining revenue, but unlocking this potential and 
sustaining investments across other sectors will depend on stronger governance and reliable O&M funding. Key 
equipment upgrades are expected to justify higher overflight fees, increasing revenue and budget flows to the MoTCA 
and SCAA and enabling commercialization and private sector participation, including establishing a Somalia Airport 
Authority. In parallel, the Project will support sectoral institutions to strengthen finance and management systems to 
fund recurrent O&M costs, retain qualified staff, and sustain service delivery. Doing so will build trust among 
stakeholders and motivate public sector decision makers to allocate sufficient O&M resources. 
43. Under Component 4, the Project will drive a gradual transition to government ownership and direct 
implementation of infrastructure projects. Up to this point, nearly all infrastructure projects in Somalia (not only 
World Bank financed but supported by all development partners) have relied on project hired consultants for project 
management. As such, Phase 1 will launch a longer-term gradual transition to direct government implementation. 
Component 2 support for institution building and capacity development will also support this transition.  
44. The selection and design of all infrastructure activities in the Project were based on recently completed climate 
risk assessments. These assessments, prepared by the World Bank as part of the recently completed CCDR, assessed 
the current and planned transport network in Somalia against climate hazards, creating a hierarchy of interventions 
necessary to ensure sustainable connectivity under adverse conditions. Critical risks identified include pluvial, fluvial, 
and coastal flooding. See the climate change section below for more information.  
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis 
45. Reinforcing the design of the MPA, Phase 1 activities have been selected based on three objectives: (i) delivering 
early success to build stakeholder buy in, political momentum, and crowd-in other financing; (ii) setting a foundation 
for future investments through institutional development and hands-on capacity building; and (iii) facilitating reliable 
and safe access throughout the country to reduce implementation risk and costs for future phases. Therefore, 
activities have been selected to ensure rapid implementation, building upon existing projects with complementary
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 14
 
Official Use Only 
investments and/or design, hands-on implementation capacity building, and national level accessibility. All activities 
have been developed through a consultative process, including direct citizen engagement.  
Component 1.A 
46. The Project reinforces the Federal Republic of Somalia’s compliance with mandatory international safety and 
security standards. The subcomponent supports International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)-compliant 
interventions in critical infrastructure and equipment, emergency response, and access control. Project costs are 
informed by data provided by SCAA, United Nations Humanitarian Air Services (UNHAS) and the Simple Network Time 
Protocol (SNTP) Lab Analysis that was collected for an airport network level climate vulnerability analysis to determine 
exposure risk to estimate damage losses and reconstruction cost.  
47. A multicriteria analysis was developed as a decision-making tool to evaluate and prioritize project airports. The 
framework was consulted and agreed between the FGS and FMS representatives. The criteria included: population 
catchment, food insecurity, aircraft movements, level of effort to meet planned airport code, number of days closed 
due to climate events, socio-economic impact, security risk.  
48. Airport Upgrades: Interventions are being designed to meet minimum requirements for runway and airstrip 
length, stripe width, obstacle limitation surfaces, apron and taxiway dimensions, and perimeter security to meet to 
ICAO Category 3C aerodrome standards.19 Based on an assessment of gaps to meet 3C standards, site specific 
improvements at each aerodrome have been identified, including: 
• 
Improved airfield runways and drainage (US$9.3 million) – Responding to the critical climate vulnerabilities of 
Somalia’s airstrips, four airports (Dhusamareb, Jowhar, Dhobley, Galkayo) have been selected for runway and 
drainage improvements under Phase 1. Investments include full rehabilitation of the runways at two of these 
airports (Jowhar and Galkayo). Runway designs meet the geometric requirements for Code C compliance, i.e. 
runway width (30 meters), runway shoulders (7.5 meters each), runway strip width (150 meters), and runway 
end safety areas (240 meters), as well as all taxiway and apron upgrade dimensions. Building off of a national 
level climate vulnerability study which highlighted key risks at all four selected airports, drainage 
improvements at all airports will account for increasing vulnerability to flooding, with drainage designs based 
on site specific flood modeling. NBS for airfield drainage will complement hard investments in capacity.  
• 
Airfield ground lighting (US$3 million) – LED ground lighting has been prioritized for two airports (Mogadishu 
and Garowe) to allow diversion flights during airspace emergencies, improved visibility during extreme 
weather events, and adaptive capacity of the airport system. These improvements are critical as part of the 
overall initiative to improve the safety and resilience of the air transport sector. 
• 
Terminal and tower improvements (US$2.95 million) – To support improved passenger safety and security, 
terminals with towers will be constructed in Dhobley and Dhusamareb. Terminal designs accommodate 100 
passengers, including waiting areas, furnishing, passenger screening equipment, solar power supply, and 
reliable water supply. In Jowhar, where a terminal is already under construction, the Project will support 
installation of key furnishings and screening equipment. In Garowe, Baidoa and Kismayo, the Project will 
support installation of improved power, water and security systems. 
• 
Perimeter fencing (US$0.55 million) – In order to prevent incursion of the airport space by wildlife and 
community members, presenting significant safety and security challenges, the existing fencing at all four local 
airports will be improved. This will also allow ICAO certification. 
49. Airfield rescue and firefighting (ARFF) (US$3.7 million). ARFF vehicles and/or equipment acquisitions will be in 
accordance with each airports ICAO ARFF category based on performance criteria (e.g., engine torque, top speed, 
 
19 ICAO Annex 14, Volume I – Aerodrome Design and Operations
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 15
 
Official Use Only 
acceleration rates to reach incident sites within defined response-times), pumping capacity (e.g., tank volumes, 
minimum output in liters per minute), chassis and driveline configurations, crew safety, and other criteria. 
Component 1.B 
50. Mogadishu resilient urban trunk drainage infrastructure. The urban area trunk drainage extension (of 
approximately 2.87 kilometers) to the current drainage network will contribute to stormwater collection to reduce 
urban flooding. Enhancements also include expanding the capacity of runoff collectors/outfalls leading to the sea, 
additional conveyance lines,20 increasing the number of inlet points for improved load handling and installing 
infiltration trenches, adding retention ponds to increase buffering during heavy rainfall.  The interventions will pilot 
nature-based solutions for localized stormwater management where feasible, such as planting native grasses in the 
retention pond, to mitigate drought impacts by enhancing water retention and reducing the urban heat island effects.  
Beyond flood risk reduction, the subcomponent will generate employment through labor-intensive construction and 
longer-term operations and maintenance, stimulate local construction supply chains, and protect businesses, markets, 
and household assets, supporting safer, more reliable urban economic activity, particularly for internally displaced 
persons and the urban poor. The investments will thus reduce economic losses associated with urban flooding and at 
the same time enhance the resilience of rapidly growing cities to increasingly frequent extreme rainfall events. Specific 
investments will include: (i) upgrading and/or installation of flood mitigation infrastructure with the protection level 
of a 1-in-25-year event, including NBS where feasible; (ii) construction of flood control structures including dykes, 
polders, manholes, and drainage; and (iii) laying out the foundation for future phases on establishment of a real-time 
flood warning system. Flood mitigation benefits will be sustained through complementary operations and 
maintenance, including routine cleaning, desilting, and solid waste management. 
51. A network layout has been delineated which optimizes the efficiency of flow paths, minimizing need for 
excavation and trenchless (no-dig) technologies use. The planned network layout and sizing will avoid the need for 
mechanical pumping for discharge at sea. The system has been designed using a design rainfall event with a return 
period of 25 years characterized by a daily precipitation of 134 millimeters and an intensity of 124 millimeters/hour. 
The trunk drain extends approximately 2.87 kilometers and is designed to convey a peak discharge of 82.54 
meters³/second. The proposed design incorporates KM Pond 4 (24,000 meters3) as a temporary storage facility, which 
helps attenuate peak flows and reduce hydraulic stress on the downstream drainage network. In addition, the system 
enables integration with serviceable secondary drainage lines to be maintained by government, transforming the 
investment from a standalone conveyance structure into a fully functional drainage network. This integrated approach 
significantly enhances system performance by rapidly expanding the effective catchment area and improving overall 
flood management capacity. The functioning of the outlet system was verified for a few scenarios: (i) normal scenario: 
mean sea level as downstream boundary condition; (ii) high tide scenario: +1.0 meters as downstream boundary 
condition, and (iii) worst case high tide scenario: +2.5 meters as downstream boundary condition. 
Component 1.C 
52. The Haleya–Ina Guha Economic Corridor is a strategic transport link in Somaliland, linking Hargeisa with the 
Ethiopian border. The corridor forms part of the Ethiopia–Somalia Regional Economic Corridor, part of the Mogadishu, 
Berbera and Bosaso corridor identified as part of the Horn of Africa Initiative. This corridor is strategically important 
as it provides a direct connection between Somalia and Ethiopia, facilitating cross-border trade, regional integration, 
and access to international markets. The corridor begins at Haleya town, approximately 16 kilometers east of Hargeisa, 
and extends southward to Ina Guha, a border town with Ethiopia, covering a total distance of about 91.5 kilometers. 
Serving both local access and international freight, the corridor carries significant heavy traffic, including an average 
of 416 heavy trucks per day, as well as several thousand light vehicles, with traffic demand projections estimated at 
 
20 Trunk drainage will exclude secondary lines which together with infiltration trenches will likely be supported through subsequent financing.
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 16
 
Official Use Only 
4.3 percent growth per year. The existing road condition is poor to extremely poor, with a combination of deteriorated 
asphalt and gravel sections, frequent potholes, erosion, and inadequate drainage. Floodplains and seasonal water 
crossings regularly disrupt traffic, making the road unreliable and unsafe. A climate change assessment identified that 
the fluvial and pluvial flood risk faced by the corridor will continue to increase. 
53. The section selected for financing supports the core traffic of the corridor: a 63 kilometers section from Isha 
Gobka, just south of Hargeisa city, to the Ethiopian border. This leverages ongoing work is already under 
implementation by the Hargeisa Municipality, including a 6.46 kilometers section linking the southern side of Hargeisa 
to Isha Gobka. Selection of this section for phase 1 followed extensive consultations with local and regional 
stakeholders, supporting trade traffic from the Berbera port bound for Ethiopia, as well as establishing a resilient link 
between Hargeisa, Salahley District, and other communities along the corridor. Implementation will leverage an 
arrangement with a UN Agency which is already implementing road construction activities in the region, financed by 
another World Bank project. 
54. As Somalia does not yet have its own road design standard, the primary design standard adopted is the 
Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) Manuals, which govern the geometric design, pavement design, drainage, and 
road safety requirements. The design places a high priority on durability and cost-effectiveness through the utilization 
of locally sourced materials, strictly adhering to the ERA Design Class DC-6 standards. Compliance with ERA standards 
is also important to guarantee the road continuity to Ethiopia as it crosses the border. The road design includes a 7 
meters wide asphalt concrete carriage way (two-lane, two-way traffic) with 2 meters wide shoulders on each side for 
safety. In settlements and junctions, the design accommodates paved shoulders, pedestrian walkways, and solar 
street lighting to support the needs of all users. Side drains have been designed to accommodate the site-specific 
demand, accounting for future climate-driven flood risk.  
55. A nationwide climate risk assessment identified this corridor as potentially vulnerable to increased fluvial and 
pluvial flooding. As a result, a more detailed climate vulnerability assessment was conducted as part of the corridor 
design process, identifying key locations mitigation measures. Key improvements to the design to ensure climate 
resilience include: (i) enhanced drainage (including increased capacity, elevated embankments, and scour protection 
works), (ii) elevated roadways in flood prone areas, (iii) stormwater catchment in settled areas to support community 
resilience, (iv) use of thermally stable pavement materials to reduce extreme heat risk, and (v) leveraging NBS to 
reduce runoff and mitigate extreme rainfall. These measures increase the cost of the investment by US$8.88 million, 
although their inclusion will reduce maintenance costs by up to 40 percent over its 20-years design life. 
Component 2 
56. Ministry level support will help development of implementing agencies. Within the MoPWRH, the Project will 
carry ongoing capacity building activities in World Bank-financed SHIIP and SURP II projects forward, such as the 
development of an Axle Load law and rollout of a ministry wide Management Information System to allow for the 
digitalization of several permitting and operational processes. It will also support the physical capacity of the ministry, 
including preparing the designs and E&S instruments for a new ministry building. In the MoTCA, the Project will 
contribute to already established capacity building and policy development plans.  Training, upskilling, and licensing 
in air navigation services and air traffic control will help raise the share of SCAA professionals holding required licenses, 
supporting international compliance. It will also finance feasibility and design studies for air transport investments in 
future MPA phases. In the MoF, identified activities include support for operationalization of a Disaster Risk Financing 
Strategy, as well as assessments and technical assistance for revenue generation and cost recovery of infrastructure 
assets, operations and maintenance financing frameworks, and Public Investment Management.  
57. Support for the development of new institutions will include the initial design of a Somali engineers’ board and 
a Somali Airports Authority. While the institutional development needs in Somalia extend far beyond these two, they 
have been selected for support under Phase one due to four considerations: (i) they have been identified as major
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 17
 
Official Use Only 
bottlenecks for sectoral development; (ii) they are expected to generate additional revenue, reducing or eliminating 
any potential burden on the national budget; (iii) they enjoy strong buy-in from relevant stakeholders; and (iv) they 
are expected to support increased private sector involvement in the infrastructure sector. The Somali engineers’ Board 
is critical for professionalizing the engineering profession, setting clear and verifiable criteria for the practice of 
engineering, and unlocking qualified Somali engineers’ ability to work within the country and region. The Somali 
Airports Authority will serve a critical role in sustainable development, operations, and maintenance of key airports 
in the country, providing an important governance role in establishing concessions with private service providers and 
as a vehicle to ensure revenue generated through landing and other fees is leveraged for maintenance and further 
development. It will also address a critical issue identified by ICAO, as SCAA currently serves as both the operator and 
regulator of airports, creating serious conflicts of interest.  
58. In addition, this component will support the preparation of future phases of the MPA. It will support a targeted 
assessment of the country’s key economic basins, to identify key economic drivers and the potential bottlenecks to 
their growth and impact on job creation. These assessments will inform the selection and design of investments under 
future phases of the MPA.   
Component 3 
59. Air Traffic Management. The Communications, Navigation, Surveillance (CNS) system standards21 set the 
foundations for safe, reliable, and continuous operations across the Somalia’s airspace. The Project will supply, install, 
integrate, commission, and provide technical support for Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast/Very Small 
Aperture Terminal (ADS-B/VSAT). ADS-B (1090 Megahertz Mode S Extended Squitter) ground surveillance system will 
enhance air traffic control and improve visibility of commercial and private aircraft operating in Somali airspace. The 
VSAT installations and acceptance testing will comply with the relevant international standards and guidelines and 
protect all surveillance data from interception or unauthorized access. Each remote VSAT terminal will connect to the 
SCAA headquarters via satellite. Cybersecurity measures include role-based access control for system users, 
integration with the SCAA’s security monitoring system, and encrypted administration. Small scale solar systems (50 
kilowatt) to be deployed at all airport sites installing ADS-B/VSAT equipment, which will require Uninterrupted Power 
Supply (UPS) backup for 30–60 minutes, as well as an auto-start generator. Clear acceptance testing protocols, 
documentation, and warranties will also be included in the technical requirements. Preventive Maintenance will 
ensure twice-yearly site inspections and annual calibration, as well as service-level agreement for remote support in 
4–8 hours, on-site support within 48–72 hours, depending on location. Investments may also include other equipment 
as required. 
60. Operations and Maintenance. Identified by various previous studies as a critical next step in the country’s 
infrastructure development, establishing dedicated and reliable structures for infrastructure operations and asset 
maintenance will be critical. This is especially through as the MPA promises to significantly contribute to Somalia’s 
physical capital. For airports, this will include options to leverage aeronautical pricing to ensure maintenance of assets 
and continuation of airport services. For urban drainage, maintenance committees composed of community members 
would be set up for all project supported infrastructure investments. 
Climate Change 
61. Climate Risk Screening. World Bank climate-risk screening rates the Project’s current hazard exposure as 
substantial but anticipates it will fall to moderate after implementation. Somalia’s climate risk profile for transport 
and urban systems is characterized by intensifying floods, droughts and extreme heat with emerging coastal 
hazards. These are amplified by rapid urbanization and FCV dynamics. Mogadishu, and secondary cities such as 
Hargeisa, Kismayo, Baidoa, Beledweyne, Dhusamareb, and Garowe, face high flood risk driven by intense rainfall, 
 
21 ICAO Annex 10 Aeronautical Telecommunications (Vol. I–V)
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 18
 
Official Use Only 
inadequate drainage, and encroachment into floodplains and hazard-prone urban areas. Airports confront 
material risks from extreme rainfall and pluvial flooding (runway and apron inundation), storm surge and sea-
level rise at coastal sites, and extreme heat that degrades pavements and equipment reliability. A transport risk 
assessment prepared for the Somalia CCDR shows pluvial flooding as the most damaging hazard, impacting 20 of 21 
assessed airports.22 The multi-criteria analysis for airport selection includes climate vulnerability criteria.  
62. The Project aligns with the Federal Republic of Somalia’s climate commitments and the goals of the Paris 
Agreement, supporting both mitigation and adaptation objectives. The proposed MPA and Phase 1 project 
contribute to Third Generation Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC3.0) and other national climate strategies. 
For mitigation, activities under 1.A (air transport) are classified as low risk since the component invests in improving 
airfield runway and drainage and safety and security at select regional and local aerodromes to enable network 
resilience. Activities under 1.B (urban trunk drainage) and 1.C (road rehabilitation and upgrading without capacity 
expansion, e.g., two-lane, two-way traffic) are Universally Aligned.  
63. For adaptation, airports and road sections financed by the MPA have been selected based on multi-criteria 
analysis, including climate resilience criteria, recognizing exposure to pluvial flooding and increasingly vulnerable 
to fluvial flooding. Design features strengthen the resilience of critical transport infrastructure to flooding and 
extreme weather events while helping maintain connectivity for passengers, trade, and humanitarian logistics during 
climate shocks. Mogadishu is prone to acute and chronic flooding due to intense seasonal rainfall, limited stormwater 
drainage capacity, flat topography, and rapid urban expansion into low-lying areas. Short-duration heavy rainfall 
events frequently overwhelm existing drainage systems, leading to flash flooding, while inadequate drainage and poor 
runoff management result in persistent water accumulation in parts of the city. For airfield upgrade (1.A), asphalt 
concrete paving will be applied, airfield drainage infrastructure capacity improved, and NBS (e.g. swales to redirect 
water and protect airfield assets) applied. Airport meteorological stations will contribute to advance detection and 
historical data to monitor and manage extreme weather events. Trunk drainage enhancement (1.B) is designed in line 
with the Mogadishu Drainage Master Plan and engineered to manage a 25-year storm event, including the expansion 
of the capacity of runoff collectors/outfalls, extension of trunk drainage to improve stormwater collection, and pilot 
NBS for localized stormwater management. The road corridor section (1.C) incorporates US$8.88 million in climate 
adaptation measures beyond the standard road design, as outlined above.    
64. For mitigation, modernized air navigation systems enable more precise and optimized flight routes, allowing 
aircraft to fly shorter, more direct paths that reduce fuel consumption and associated Carbon Dioxide (CO2) 
emissions. Improved upper airspace management can guide aircraft to avoid regions of the atmosphere where 
contrail formation is most likely, reducing the non-CO2 climate warming effects of aviation. By enabling better airspace 
efficiency through reduced holding patterns, ground delays, and inefficient routing, upgraded air navigation 
infrastructure can collectively deliver reductions in the aviation sector's overall carbon footprint at scale. 
Gender 
65. Women and girls are disproportionally affected by unemployment and weak economic integration. Women, 
youth, persons with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups in Somali cities face disproportionate impacts from 
limited access to climate-resilient infrastructure and services, which constrains mobility, access to services, safety, and 
economic opportunities. Recurrent flooding and the resulting poor connectivity disrupt daily livelihoods, heighten 
risks during extreme weather and displacement, and reinforce structural barriers. In Somalia, just over half of the 
working-age population participate in the labor market, with low rates for women (43 percent) and youth (39 
percent).23 Women represent only 3.62 percent of total employment in the transportation and storage sector, 
 
22 World Bank assessment 
23 Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards and Inclusive Jobs Agenda. World Bank. June 2021
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 19
 
Official Use Only 
reflecting deep structural gender gaps in access to technical and operational roles.24 Within SCAA, women account for 
19.76 percent of employees; but participation is lower in Air Traffic Management (ATM), where women represent 
only 13 percent of the workforce. Among these, around 55 percent hold a zero rating (compared with 41 percent of 
men), meaning they are not operationally deployable, and only a very small proportion are fully licensed to handle 
complex or multi-sector operations. Women remain underrepresented in transport due entrenched gender 
stereotypes that discourage participation in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields and 
reinforce employer biases regarding "masculine" roles. During the school-to-work transition, women also face 
information asymmetries, limited access to the professional networks, and insufficient quality training. In highly 
technical functions such as ATMs, these barriers result not only in lower entry rates but also slower progression toward 
full operational certification (from “zero rating” to fully licensed status). At the same time, there is an opportunity to 
equip women with specialized skills in emerging sectors, such as aviation, where demand for technical expertise is 
increasing.  
66. The Project addresses these constraints through several channels: a skills demand assessment in the aviation 
sector, including a labor profile across SCAA, airport management, and Air Navigation Service providers, as well as a 
career cycle analysis of barriers to women’s participation, to inform the design of training programs at different skill 
levels for subsequent MPA phases; and proactive outreach by the engineers’ board/MoPWRH and Memorandums of 
Understanding with schools and universities to raise awareness and promote female participation in engineering 
careers. The Project will also place a specific focus on ATM capacity building to increase the number of women who 
are fully licensed and operationally deployable. Progression from zero rating to higher certification levels (up to three 
ratings) leading to full licensing significantly improves employability, operational responsibility, and career 
progression. Through the Project an additional 10 women will become fully licensed, increasing the share of women 
among all fully licensed staff from 7 percent to 30 percent. Licensing will be delivered through an ICAO-recognized 
institution in East Africa, with comprehensive support provided to women, including training costs, travel, and 
stipends. Gender sensitization will also be conducted within SCAA, including for supervisors of participating women. 
Licensing enables women to handle more complex operations, supervise multiple sectors, and access higher-paying 
positions, with potential salary increases above 100 percent from zero rating to full certification. 
Economic Analysis 
67. Airport Improvements: The airport analysis quantifies the direct costs in infrastructure, safety and security, 
monitoring, O&M, and training. Costing is informed by sites specific assessments and benchmarking of unit costs with 
similar projects in Somalia. Operational data on aircraft movements, passengers, and landing charges are forecast 
over a 23-year horizon with a 3.6 percent annual growth rate. The quantified benefits comprise fleet operation cost 
savings, travel time savings, and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission reductions, with remaining benefits such as 
improved cargo handling, improved emergency and humanitarian response, and socio-economic spillovers (jobs, 
market access) acknowledged as additional. The cost-benefit analysis (CBA) over 23 years (a 3-year construction 
period) with a 6 percent discount rate shows the Net Present Value (NPV) of US$16.3 million and an Economic Internal 
Rate of Return (EIRR) of 14.5 percent, with a Benefit-Cost Ratio (BCR) of 1.75. A sensitivity analysis with a 20 percent 
cost overrun and a 20 percent reduction in benefits demonstrates that the results remain highly positive (EIRR=8.2 
percent). The switching value analysis indicates that NPV would reach zero only if project costs were to increase by 
177 percent above the base case. The inclusion of shadow carbon pricing under both low and high price scenarios 
results in NPVs of US$25.0 million and US$33.7 million and EIRRs of 17.9 percent and 21.0 percent, respectively. 
 
24 ILOSTAT (2022)
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 20
 
Official Use Only 
68. Urban drainage. CBA has been conducted for the proposed O-16 trunk drainage serving the L2 catchment in 
Mogadishu (2.87 kilometers, 9,456 households, 66,192 persons using a 250m buffer25) to assess the value of 
anticipated flood risk reduction benefits relative to the estimated US$68 million investment cost. The analysis 
quantifies four benefit streams: avoided property damage to residential buildings (US$5.15 million per year based on 
a 45 percent flood reduction), avoided household income loss (US$98,000 per year), construction-phase employment 
(US$247,000 one-time), and avoided damage to public infrastructure including roads, the airport, WASH and health 
facilities, and schools (US$421,000 per year). At a 6 percent discount rate, the investment yields a positive NPV of 
US$37.7 million, an EIRR of 9.4 percent, and a BCR of 1.53.  The analysis applies an Expected Annual Damage (EAD) 
framework, integrating flood exposure modeling, and a US$193 million ground floor asset base derived from the hex 
construction cost grid developed as part of an ongoing World Bank technical assistance. Benefits grow at 4.3 percent 
per annum (population plus urbanization). The quantified benefit streams do not capture several important channels 
which will improve the quality of life for beneficiaries, including avoided displacement costs, reduced waterborne 
disease incidence, lives saved, household contents losses, and urban land value effects. 
69. Economic Corridor. CBA was undertaken for the Economic Corridor investments proposed under Component 1.C, 
applying the HDM-4 Road User Cost model to estimate reductions in vehicle operating costs, travel time savings, 
improvements in road safety, and changes in GHG emissions. Over a 20-year evaluation horizon and using a 6 percent 
discount rate, the Project yields a NPV of US$38.6 million (of which the estimated road safety benefits are US$8.2 
million) and an EIRR of 15.2 percent. Sensitivity testing, incorporating a 20 percent increase in costs and a 20 percent 
reduction in benefits, indicates that the results remain economically robust, with a NPV of US$24.5 million an EIRR of 
11.1 percent. The inclusion of shadow carbon pricing under both low and high price scenarios results in NPVs of 
US$37.4 million and US$36.1 million and EIRRs of 15.0 percent and 14.7 percent, respectively. The Road Safety 
Screening and Appraisal Tool was used to identify and evaluate the potential traffic and road safety risks arising from 
the Project activities, with the Project interventions expected to reduce crash fatalities by 21 percent.  
70. GHG accounting. Somalia's total GHG emissions are low, estimated at 41 MtCO2eq in 2020, representing less than 
0.03 percent of total global emissions, although per capita emission are not negligible (at around a third of the global 
average) and have the potential to grow rapidly.26 The Project is assessed as contributing a net reduction in GHG 
emissions of 197,833 MtCO2eq over the life of the investments, or 8,403 tons per year. Key contributions to the 
Project’s GHG impact include the aviation investments which will enable the use of more efficient aircraft, modern 
avionics, improved routing, and upgraded navigation systems, as well as the economic corridor. The Project does not 
prevent a future transition to lower carbon alternatives. 
71. Financial Analysis. The aviation sector accounted for 9.4 percent of all domestic revenue in 2024. In that year, 
revenues totaled US$34.8 million, with the majority coming from overflight fees, supplemented by airport fees, ticket 
sales tax, and passenger charges. The government also benefits from other airport fees and ticket sales taxes, including 
US$3.9 million in airport fees and US$6.4 million in ticket sales tax (about 14 percent of the overall sales tax for 2024). 
The Civil Aviation Division charges US$15 per departing international passenger, generating US$2.2 million in 2024. 
Initial estimates have indicated substantial opportunities to increase generated revenue by aligning with international 
best practice, including standardizing the charging methodology27 for overflight fees, which could triple revenues. 
 
25 The 250 m buffer was selected as an intermediate, pragmatic estimate of expected beneficiaries. It balances topography-driven drainage effects 
with less spatially deterministic factors such as road accessibility and indirect benefits from reduced flooding along mobility corridors,. Future 
investments in secondary drainage will significantly magnify this impact (up to 23,000 households, 140,000 persons). 
26 The Federal Republic of Somalia (2022). Somalia’s First Biennial Update Report to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCC). Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MoECC), Mogadishu, Somalia. 
27 Considering aircraft weight, distance travelled, and cost recovery.
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 21
 
Official Use Only 
B. Fiduciary 
72. Financial Management Arrangements. Project funds will be channeled through the Federal MoF to a designated 
account (DA) at the Central Bank of Somalia. The Project will utilize Government public financial management systems 
for budgeting, accounting, funds flow/banking, financial reporting, and audit oversight, with support from technical 
assistance that includes explicit knowledge transfer requirements. FM arrangements will leverage the FGS’s 
centralized fiduciary platform by working closely with the External Assistance Fiduciary Directorate (EAFD) housed in 
the Offices of the Accountant General. Quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) will be generated directly from the 
core Public Financial Management (PFM) system and submitted within 45 days of quarter end, and annual external 
audits will be carried out by the Office of the Auditor General in accordance with the PFM Act and Cash Basis 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards. This project will adopt the FundsChain platform to enhance 
transparency, traceability, and efficiency in the Project financial management. FundsChain will be integrated with 
Somalia Financial Information Management System (SFMIS), using payment flows alongside FundsChain's reporting 
capabilities. In addition, the platform will be used to track built and procured fixed assets, enhancing the expenditure 
reporting and end-to-end traceability of project resources within the three implementing entities. The Project will 
follow the transaction-based method of disbursement, which will include advances, reimbursements, direct 
payments, and special commitments. An initial advance will be disbursed to the DA following submission of withdrawal 
application to the World Bank accompanied by a six-month cash forecast. Subsequently, the Project will draw down 
on the proceeds of the grant following submission of an application for withdrawal accompanied by statement of 
expenditure (SOE) incurred. The implementing agencies will manage these processes in accordance with the World 
Bank’s procedures. Withdrawal applications will be submitted via Client Connection, and disbursements will be made 
based on verified eligible expenditures. One DA in US$ managed by the MoF will be opened at the Central Bank of 
Somalia in the name of the Project. All deposits and payments from this account will adhere to the provisions outlined 
in the Financing Agreement and Disbursement and Financial Information Letter. Authorized signatories will be 
designated to ensure compliance with World Bank disbursement procedures, and a grievance redress mechanism will 
be established to support transparent fund flows.  
73. The FM risk is assessed as High. The fiduciary environment in Somalia remains challenging, with some potential 
levels of mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency, and corruption. Although anticorruption and public sector 
regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. Appropriate 
risk mitigation measures, including periodic extended implementation support activities complemented by close 
monitoring, will be undertaken in addition to providing on-the-ground fiduciary capacity support to the Project. The 
Project will ensure that the Project teams always have in place dedicated procurement and Financial Management 
specialists who are competitively selected and adequately trained jointly with the EAFD Unit and other relevant staff 
within the Office of the Accountant General. A series of on-the-job fiduciary training and the World Bank’s periodic 
review and implementation support will be part of mitigation measures. 
74. Procurement Arrangements. Procurement will follow the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF 
Borrowers: Procurement in Investment Project Financing - Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services (7th 
Edition, September 2025) and be subject to the Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines dated October 15, 2006, revised in 
January 2011, and as of July 1, 2016. Procurement plans will be registered in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in 
Procurement (STEP).  Guided by the Federal Republic of Somalia’s country specific thresholds, methods will include 
open international and national Request for Bids for civil works, using the Bank Standard Procurement Documents for 
contracts subject to international competition; Request for Quotations for small works and goods; and competitive 
selection of consulting firms and individual consultants using standard Bank methods, with prior- and post-review to 
be specified in the Procurement Plan in STEP. For internationally competitive procurement packages estimated to cost 
more than US$10 million, an early market engagement shall be carried out, with prior review by the Bank. Direct
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 22
 
Official Use Only 
selections for specialized/non-consulting interventions will be minimized but may include the use of the World Bank 
Standard Form of Agreement for UN Agencies for output-based delivery. 
75. The Procurement risk is assessed as High. The main risks identified in the procurement capacity assessment are 
(i) the Project’s broader scope and multiple ministries may complicate coordination and turnaround times;  (ii) 
variations in institutional capacity across the MoF, MoPWRH, and MoTCA may lead to inconsistencies in procurement 
documentation, evaluation quality, and contract administration, and (iii) inadequate capacity for contract 
management may result in lack of adherence to contractual obligations, poor quality, cost and time overruns. To 
ensure that procurement is carried out satisfactorily, mitigation measures to bolster implementation capacity will be 
applied, such as: (i) maintain centralized fiduciary oversight within the MoF and conduct periodic inter-agency 
coordination reviews to monitor procurement progress; (ii) Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS), to be 
further discussed with the client; (iii) mobilizing qualified consultants for procurement handling (and contract 
management), including engaging specialized technical backstopping support, where necessary, from institutions such 
as ICAO, the World Food Program, and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) to strengthen 
preparation and review of aviation-related designs and technical specifications; (iv) the inclusion in the procurement 
section of the Project Operations Manual formalizing the coordination mechanism between the Project teams, 
detailing the roles, responsibilities, and time frames for carrying out the procurement functions; and (v) training. 
76. Market Situation: The operational environment is characterized by significant infrastructure shortages, 
susceptibility to climate-related issues, and a high implementation risk. Security concerns, logistical obstacles, and 
restrictions on seasonal access may hinder the deployment and oversight of contractors. Potential impact of these on 
procurement processes include (i) lack of certainty that foreign companies are willing to participate in the 
procurement processes, given the security context of the country; (ii) the capacity and experience of domestic 
suppliers/contractors can be limited; (iii) Socio-economic and environmental aspects will be taken into consideration 
to align with sustainability principles; (iv) higher bid prices due to security-related costs, insurance premiums, logistics 
challenges, and risk contingencies incorporated by bidders; and (v) logistical and supply chain constraints, including 
import dependency for specialized equipment and construction materials, which may affect delivery timelines and 
pricing. These market related constraints necessitate early market engagement to understand the size, composition, 
and capabilities of the target market, and the identification of factors that could contribute to successful procurement. 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate 
Legal Operational Policies 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Environmental and Social (E&S) 
77. The Program has an overall E&S Risk Classification of High, reflecting the nature, scale, geographic footprint, and 
implementation context of Phase 1 investments which will finance large‑scale civil works for urban drainage, economic 
corridor road upgrading, and aviation infrastructure rehabilitation in a fragile and conflict‑affected environment. 
Impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services may arise from land clearance, habitat disturbance, and changes in 
drainage or land use, particularly along corridor sections traversing peri‑urban and rural areas. Cultural heritage risks
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 23
 
Official Use Only 
are expected to be limited but cannot be ruled out, requiring screening and application of chance‑find procedures 
during construction. 
78. Environmental and social risks. Environmental risks are related to construction‑induced impacts, including air and 
noise pollution, dust generation, solid and hazardous waste, wastewater discharge, and increased demand for water, 
energy, and construction materials. The large footprint of corridor upgrading raises the potential for cumulative and 
indirect impacts on ecosystems, hydrology, and surrounding communities, while specific risks for the aviation facilities 
include health and safety risks at the airports' fuel storage facility; life and fire safety of airport users as public access 
buildings; emergency preparedness and response and potential legacy soil and groundwater contamination. 
Environmental risks and impacts are further compounded by weak regulatory oversight, limited hazardous‑waste 
management capacity, and climate‑related stressors, including flooding and extreme rainfall, which can exacerbate 
impacts if not adequately managed. On social side, the Project faces high risks associated with community health and 
safety, land acquisition and resettlement, labor influx, and social cohesion. Civil works may lead to temporary or 
permanent physical and economic displacement, disruption of access and livelihoods, and increased exposure of 
communities to traffic hazards, accidents, and pollution. Somalia’s complex land tenure systems, prevalence of 
informal land use, and presence of vulnerable groups including Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), minority clans, 
women, and youth heighten the risk of exclusion, grievances, and conflict if impacts are not carefully managed. 
79. The Project also presents elevated risks of gender‑based violence (GBV), sexual exploitation and abuse, and 
sexual harassment (SEA/SH), driven by labor‑intensive works, labor influx, power imbalances, and limited access to 
survivor support services. Security‑related risks, including the potential use of security personnel to safeguard project 
assets, further increase the complexity of managing community safety in certain locations. 
80. Institutional capacity constraints, including uneven experience across implementing agencies and limited 
national and subnational E&S enforcement systems, represent a cross‑cutting risk that could affect timely and 
effective mitigation. Pillar 3 introduces additional risks related to operational sustainability, requiring robust 
operations and maintenance arrangements, revenue mechanisms, and institutional capacity to ensure compliance 
with E&S requirements over the life of the assets. 
81. These risks will be managed through a comprehensive ESF‑based approach, including site‑specific 
Envronmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs)/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMPs), 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs), Labor Management Procedures, Stakeholder Engagement Plans, Security 
Management measures, and SEA/SH mitigation actions, supported by enhanced supervision, third‑party support, and 
capacity building. The above assessments and plans for all required activities are being finalized, with disclosure 
required prior to the commencement of civil works. Continuous stakeholder engagement and accessible grievance 
redress mechanisms, including GBV‑specific channels, will be critical to maintaining community trust and managing 
risks throughout implementation. 
 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES 
82. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project 
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the 
Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines 
whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and 
the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address 
complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 24
 
Official Use Only 
been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity 
to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s GRS, visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. 
For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit 
https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
 
VI. KEY RISKS 
83. The overall risk is assessed as High. Noting the FCV context and resulting constant changes in the types and 
severities of project risks, a holistic approach to risk mitigation has been adopted through the MPA, including regular 
reassessment of the risk categories and mitigation measures on a bi-annual basis, incorporation of security and other 
risks into procurement documents, maintaining a geographically flexible approach to activity selection under future 
MPA Phases to allow incorporation of changes to the security and political environment, and systematically 
incorporating risk identification and mitigation into the MPA’s learning agenda. Table 3 provides key risks and 
mitigation measures. 
Table 3: Project Risks and Mitigation 
Risks 
Mitigation Measures 
Political and Governance: High 
Somalia’s FCV context is highly complex, 
characterized by heightened political 
contestation and fragile intergovernmental 
relations, a weak social contract between 
the state and citizens, and deep-seated 
intercommunal divisions. Somalia 
continues to face protracted conflict and 
political brinksmanship, resulting in an 
uncertain political and security outlook.  
• Leveraging of MPA phases to iteratively scale-up and adapt based on lessons 
and FCV context, and encourage sustained engagement and learning 
• Program design leveraging consultation with all stakeholders and 
intergovernmental platforms 
• Geographic distribution of project sites to maximize flexibility 
• Evidence-based decision-making for the allocation of resources in future phases 
• Investments planned under Phase I benefitted from tailored FCV analysis, 
regular FCV and political economy support will be provided to identify and 
manage emerging risks in project implementation  
Macroeconomics: Substantial 
Somalia continues to be faced with low 
revenue mobilization, limited fiscal and 
monetary tools, and declining humanitarian 
and development assistance. 
• Aims to strengthen Somalia’s domestic revenue through reform of the aviation 
overflight fee structure as well as the overseeing governance structures. 
• Pillar 3 of the MPA will consistently strengthen the government’s ability to 
capture and utilize sector revenue for operations and maintenance of assets. 
Sector Strategies and Policies: Substantial 
The infrastructure sector is challenged by 
unclear government roles in the 
infrastructure sector, including allocation of 
responsibility between levels of 
government and between ministries at the 
FGS level, associated weak coordination, 
and limited economic regulation on pricing.  
• A National Transport Policy is currently under development through the World 
Bank financed SHIIP project, which will clearly delineate sectoral responsibilities. 
Other strategies, including a road safety strategy, are also under development 
and will guide implementation of the MPA. 
• The MPA’s Pillar 2 will iteratively address sectoral challenges over time. 
• Aviation sector investments have been chosen with consideration for their 
potential to attract commercial operators and generate self-sustaining revenue. 
Technical Design: Substantial 
The complexity of overall bundling of multi-
sectoral investments in the MPA structure 
increases technical coordination demands. 
• Project implementation structures are designed to ensure that implementing 
agencies have clear responsibility for activities within their mandates. 
• Project activities jointly identified by project stakeholders, while considering 
access constraints and readiness. More than 30 percent of project investments 
are ready for immediate tender at project approval. 
Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability: Substantial
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
Page 25
 
Official Use Only 
Challenges include fragmented institutions, 
dependence on international partners, 
shortages of qualified staff, and limited 
experience in some implementing entities. 
• Builds on a strong track record of delivery at the FGS and municipal level within 
the SURP-II and SHIIP engagements, to be leveraged for delivery of the MPA  
• Where context and capacities encourage, the use of reputable implementing 
partners and UN, will ensure effective implementation and coordination. 
Fiduciary: High 
Risks stem from nascent legal and 
operational systems and weak 
procurement practices. Prior procurements 
in Somalia highlight significant politization, 
delays, and integrity risk.   
• As with other World Bank projects, the MoF’s External Assistance Fiduciary 
Department will be responsible for FM of the Project. 
• Ongoing PFM and transparency reforms at the country level are expected to 
further reduce residual risk for financial management 
Environmental and Social: High 
Environmental risks are driven by the 
program’s scale, dispersion, and fragile 
context. MPA will fund multi-sector 
infrastructure across diverse ecological and 
social settings, increasing the chance of 
impacting fragile areas. Social risks include 
contextual, institutional, project factors 
that elevate likelihood of adverse impacts. 
• Environmental and Social Impact Assessments, as well as Resettlement Action 
Plans are being developed for all investments and will be reviewed and cleared 
by the Bank prior to the beginning of project sites.  
• Aviation sector activities will be conducted entirely within the footprint of 
existing airports, requiring no land take. 
• Economic corridor activities have been designed to account for E&S risk, 
including adjusting the proposed alignment to avoid environmental impacts. 
Stakeholders: High 
Somalia is characterized by the lack of trust 
between key groups in government and 
society, and the accompanying high levels 
of contestation and violence, presenting a 
significant risk to all projects implemented 
in the country. In addition, the significant 
multi-sectoral coordination and decision-
making required presents a risk of delay. 
• Individual project activities have been discussed with government, including 
through dissemination workshops during design process, incorporating 
feedback and local needs. 
• The proposed implementation arrangements have been designed to ensure 
relevant ministries maintain responsibility for delivery within their mandates. 
• Within the first Phase of the MPA all decisions on resource allocations were 
made prior to approval, preventing disputes between stakeholders. 
Other – Security: High 
Somalia continues to face significant 
insecurity challenges, violent extremist 
groups exerting control and influence 
across large parts of the country. Such 
challenges affect access to locations and 
security for staff and project stakeholders. 
• Phase 1 activities have taken security risks, with prioritized activities in lower 
risk regions and/or lower exposure investments. 
• Security considerations are criteria for activity selection and prioritization 
• Mitigation includes close coordination with security authorities and local 
communities, use of Third-Party Monitoring, use of remote monitoring, and 
management of project visibility. 
• Regular engagement with the Government during project implementation to 
assess and manage the evolving security context.
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
Page 26 
 
Official Use Only 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate 
 
Program Development Objective Indicators 
Program Development Objective(s) 
to increase access to resilient infrastructure and infrastructure sector jobs, and improve the capacity of select institutions. 
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
Baseline 
Closing Period 
Increased Access to Resilient Infrastructure  
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
820,000 
➢Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Female (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
410,000 
➢Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Youth (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
574,000 
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
917,000 
➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
459,000 
➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
642,000 
Increased access to Infrastructure sector jobs  
Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities (Days)
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
Page 27 
 
Official Use Only 
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
225,000 
➢Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities - Female (Days)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
22,500 
➢Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities - Youth (Days)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
157,500 
Improved Capacity of Select Institutions  
Government staff receiving training in core technical disciplines and receiving required licenses (as applicable) (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
40 
Intermediate Indicators by Components 
Baseline 
Closing Period 
Resilient Infrastructure for Connectivity, Jobs, and Growth  
Airports upgraded to a ICAO Code 3C Classification (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
2 
➢Airfield runways rehabilitated or maintained with climate-resilient measures (Number) (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
2 
Installation of Airfield Ground Lighting for international diversion access (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
2 
Airfield rescue and firefighting (ARFF) vehicles installed in airports (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
9 
Length of drainage constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
58.87 
➢Length of trunk drainage constructed (Kilometers)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
Page 28 
 
Official Use Only 
0 
2.87 
➢Length of ancillary drainage constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
56 
Length of economic corridor constructed (Kilometers)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
63 
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure met their needs (Percentage)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
80 
Percentage of women in project areas who consider that their needs and priorities have been taken into account in final planning decisions and design 
(Percentage)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
65 
Institutional Transformation and Human Capacity Building  
Roadmap for implementation of Somali Aviation Authority developed (Yes/No)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
No 
Yes 
Roadmap for implementation of Somali engineer's board developed (Yes/No)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
No 
Yes 
Air Navigation Service professionals employed by the Somalia Civil Aviation Authority who hold the required licenses (Percentage)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
17 
41 
New fully licensed Air Traffic Management (ATM) professionals employed by SCAA who are women (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
10 
Sustainable Operations and Management  
Flight Information Region coverage and reliability provided by upgraded air navigation systems (Percentage)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
100 
Improved communication, navigation and surveillance systems (Yes/No)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
No 
Yes 
➢Installation of Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast (ADS-B) ground stations (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
Page 29 
 
Official Use Only 
0 
7 
➢Installation of Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) network (Number)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
7 
Share of project investments with costed operations and maintenance plans adopted by responsible authority (Percentage)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
0 
100 
Infrastructure Implementation Coordination and Management  
Roadmap developed for transition to use of civil servants in project implementation (Yes/No)  
Apr/2026 
Jun/2031 
No 
Yes
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 
 
Official Use Only 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
 
Increased Access to Resilient Infrastructure 
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
The Corporate Results Indicator counts the number of people who directly use, or can reliably access, transport assets 
and services upgraded or provided by the Project. Direct users are people living or working within the functional 
catchment of an improved transport asset, as well as regular users of services. In the case of this project, includes the 
direct users of the economic corridor, as well as the project airports. Due to the nature of the Somali air network and 
Mogadishu’s role as the central hub, AAIA passengers is used as a proxy for overall passengers to avoid double counting. 
For specific methodological guidance, see the WBG Scorecard Results indicator methodology. 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Aviation data based on regular monitoring by SCAA. Road corridor data to measured through a traffic count at project 
close. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH 
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Female (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
Sub-indicator to measure the number of female beneficiaries – calculated as 50% of total beneficiaries 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
50 percent of parent indicator 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MoTCA, MoPWRH 
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services - Youth (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
Sub-indicator to measure the number of youth beneficiaries – calculated as 70% percent of total beneficiaries based on 
census data. 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
70 percent of parent indicator 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH 
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
The Corporate Results Indicator counts the number of people who benefit directly or indirectly from investments that 
integrate climate‑resilient/adaptation measures into infrastructure and the services it provides (e.g., roads and bridges 
with all‑weather access, flood protection, drainage, water/sanitation, shelters, nature‑based infrastructure). Benefits 
may include reduced service disruption and damage from climate hazards, year‑round connectivity, improved safety and 
access to services, and reduced exposure to floods and other climate risks. In this project, it is measured as the sum of 
the direct and indirect road corridor users, calculated as per the corporate results indicator methodology for “Millions of 
people that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services”; the beneficiaries of the 
Mogadishu trunk drainage improvements calculated using a 250 meter buffer to project investments (utilizing WorldPop 
population distribution); and the airport passengers (proxied by annual passengers traveling through AAIA). 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close; WorldPop 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Assessed individually for each investment in line with the above methodologies 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
Sub-indicator to measure the number of female beneficiaries – calculated as 50% of total beneficiaries 
Frequency 
Project close
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 
 
Official Use Only 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
50 percent of parent indicator 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MoTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI    
Description 
Sub-indicator to measure the number of youth beneficiaries – calculated as 70% of total beneficiaries 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
SCAA air traffic monitoring; road corridor traffic counts at project close  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
70 percent of parent indicator 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
Increased Access to Infrastructure Sector Jobs 
Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities (Days) CRI    
Description 
The Corporate Results Indicator (more and better jobs) counts the number of people who benefit directly from 
employment opporutnieis through public works programs.  Workers directly engaged in construction for the Project 
(prime contractor and subcontractors), including site management, skilled and unskilled labor, safety staff, and quality 
control. Off-site workers in facilities dedicated to the Project (e.g., concrete batching, pre-cast yards) where ≥75% of 
their output is for the Project. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports; 
Contractor payroll records  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Sum of days worked by all eligible workers during the period 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities (Days) - Female CRI    
Description 
 Sub-indicator to measure the number of female beneficiaries 
Frequency 
 Bi-annual 
Data source 
 Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports; 
Contractor payroll records  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
 Sum of days worked by all eligible workers during the period 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MOTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
Direct person-days of employment generated by construction activities (Days) – Youth CRI   
Description 
 Sub-indicator to measure the number of youth beneficiaries 
Frequency 
 Bi-annual 
Data source 
 Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports; 
Contractor payroll records  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
 Sum of days worked by all eligible workers during the period 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MoTCA, MoPWRH, BRA 
Improved Capacity of Select Institutions 
Government staff receiving training in core technical disciplines and receiving required licenses (as applicable) 
Description 
Count of the number of people who are trained in their core technical disciplines within the implementing Ministries. To 
include Air Navigation Specialists within MoTCA (and SCAA), engineers within MoPWRH and other technical staff. For 
ANS Specialists, will include only those whose training results in receiving an additional rating for their license. For 
engineers, any training on engineering will be counted, pending the establishment of a Somali engineers’ Board 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 
 
Official Use Only 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Reporting by implementing agencies on the Project supported training outcomes 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA, MoPWRH, MoF 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
Resilient Infrastructure for Connectivity, Jobs, and Growth  
Airports upgraded to a ICAO Code 3C Classification 
Description 
The indicator measures the number of project airports which meet an ICAO 3C classification based on project 
investments 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports. SCAA 
inspection/audit reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Assessment of airfield designs; SCAA certification of airport 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Airfield runways rehabilitated or maintained with climate-resilient measures (Number)    
Description 
The indicator measures the number of runway pavements and/or airstrips at domestic or international airfields that have 
been rehabilitated or received scheduled maintenance and integrates defined climate resilient measures aligned with the 
Project’s engineering specifications. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports. SCAA 
inspection/audit reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Assessment of airfield designs 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Installation of Airfield Ground Lighting for international diversion access (Number)    
Description 
The indicator measures the number of aerodromes that have installed and commissioned airfield ground lighting systems 
enabling safe night/low-visibility operations for international diversion, in accordance with ICAO Annex 14 and applicable 
national standards. “AGL system” includes runway edge lights, threshold/end lights, runway end identifier lights (as 
applicable), approach lighting system appropriate to runway category, PAPI/VASI, taxiway lights or reflectors sufficient 
for safe movement, AGL power and control (CCR, regulators), and standby power. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports;  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Engineer’s SAT/commissioning certificates; and SCAA inspection/audit reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Airfield rescue and firefighting (ARFF) vehicles (Number)    
Description 
The indciator counts the number of specialized ARFF vehicles procured, delivered, and commissioned into operational 
service at designated aerodromes in accordance with ICAO Annex 14 and national requirements for each project site’s 
ARFF category. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
SAT certificates; registration/insurance documents; inventory of agents and equipment; crew training records; 
operational roster entries. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; SCAA inspection/audit reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 
 
Official Use Only 
Length of drainage constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)    
Description 
 Measures the total centerline length, in kilometers, of drainage infrastructure that has been newly constructed or 
rehabilitated to restore design hydraulic performance and structural integrity.  
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Review of supervising engineer progress reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH, MoTCA, BRA 
Length of  trunk drainage constructed (Kilometers)    
Description 
 Measures the total centerline length, in kilometers, of trunk (primary) drainage infrastructure that has been newly 
constructed or rehabilitated to restore design hydraulic performance and structural integrity. “Trunk drainage” refers to 
primary/major conduits that convey runoff to outfalls or retention/detention systems (e.g., main open channels, 
box/pipe culverts of primary networks, large storm sewers). It may include secondary collectors where they function as 
part of the backbone network serving sizable catchments. Drainage assets minimum size thresholds (e.g., ≥1.0 m bottom 
width for open channels, ≥1.2 m diameter or box equivalent for culverts/storm sewers), adapted to local standards and 
hydrology. 
 
Frequency 
 Bi-annual 
Data source 
 Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Review of supervising engineer progress reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MoPWRH 
Length of ancillary drainage constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)    
Description 
Measures the total centerline length, in kilometers, of ancillary drainage infrastructure that has been newly constructed 
or rehabilitated to restore design hydraulic performance and structural integrity. In the Project, “Ancillary drainage” 
specifically refers to longitudinal drainage along roadways and runways. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Review of supervising engineer progress reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH, MoTCA 
Length of economic corridor constructed (Kilometers) 
Description 
Measures the total centerline length, in kilometers, of roadway built in the Project which serves primary trade and transit 
traffic.  
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Contractor and supervising engineer monthly progress reports  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Review of supervising engineer progress reports 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH 
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure met their needs (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator measures the satisfaction levels of beneficiaries who directly benefit from improved roads and 
infrastructure under the Project. Satisfaction will be assessed through focus group discussions (FGDs) and/or surveys, 
evaluating multiple dimensions, including Quality of rehabilitated infrastructure and Improved access to services and 
jobs. 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
FDGs conducted as part of project completion 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Structured focus group discussions held during the Project’s completion phase  
Responsibility for Data 
MoPWRH, MoTCA
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 
 
Official Use Only 
Collection 
Percentage of women in project areas who consider that their needs and priorities have been taken into account in final planning decisions and 
design (Percentage) 
Description 
This indicator measures the extent of meaningful participation of women in project implementation by assessing 
whether they feel their needs and priorities were reflected in final planning and design decisions. 
Frequency 
Project close 
Data source 
FDGs conducted as part of project completion 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Structured focus group discussions held during the Project’s completion phase  
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH, MoTCA 
Institutional Transformation and Human Capacity Building  
Roadmap for implementation of Somali Aviation Authority (Yes/No)    
Description 
A comprehensive roadmap document that sets out the phased institutional, legal, operational, financial, and HR steps to 
establish and operationalize the Somali Aviation Authority (SAA), including timelines, responsibilities, resource needs, risk 
management, and a monitoring framework, is prepared and formally endorsed by the competent authority. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports;  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Consultant final deliverables accepted by MoTCA 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
 MoTCA 
Roadmap for implementation of Somali engineers’ board developed (Yes/No)    
Description 
A comprehensive roadmap document that sets out the phased institutional, legal, operational, financial, and HR steps to 
establish and operationalize the Somali engineers’ board, including timelines, responsibilities, resource needs, risk 
management, and a monitoring framework, is prepared and formally endorsed by the competent authority. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports;  
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Consultant final deliverables accepted by MoPWRH 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH 
Air Navigation Service professionals employed by the Somalia Civil Aviation Authority who hold the required licenses (percentage) 
Description 
The indciator measures the share of approved technical/operational aviation positions at the Somalia Civil Aviation 
Authority (SCAA) that are filled by qualified personnel. Licensed aviation professionals are staff in safety- and 
service-critical cadres such as: air traffic services, air navigation services (CNS engineering), aeronautical information 
management, flight operations and airworthiness inspectors, aerodrome safety/standards, airfield rescue and 
firefighting, search and rescue coordination, aviation security (as per national regulations), and meteorology liaison 
posted to aviation operations. Qualified means the employee meets the minimum requirements for the post under the 
State’s regulations (e.g., valid license/endorsement where applicable, required recurrent training and medical exams).  
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Licensing and training records (SCAA licensing unit, inspectorate files) 
to verify that filled posts meet qualification requirements. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
SCAA approved organizational structure and annual staffing plan 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
New fully licensed Air Traffic Management (ATM) professionals employed by SCAA who are women (number)   
Description 
This indicator measures the number of new women who, through the Project, successfully obtain a full Air Traffic 
Management (ATM) operational license and are employed by SCAA. ATM refers to the operational functions responsible 
for managing aircraft movements safely and efficiently, including Air Traffic Control (ATC), Air Traffic Flow Management 
(ATFM), and Airspace Management (ASM).
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 
 
Official Use Only 
“Fully licensed” means that the individual meets the operational requirements under national and international aviation 
regulations, including valid licensing/endorsements, required recurrent training, and medical certification, and is 
operationally deployable. Achieving full licensing requires completion of a structured sequence of advanced training and 
certification programs, including Area Control Procedural, Approach Control Procedural, Aerodrome Control (ICAO 052), 
On-the-Job Training Instructor Course, and CPDLC/ADS-B systems training. 
 
Baseline: The baseline is 0, as the indicator measures new fully licensed women supported by the Project. While SCAA 
currently has 86 ATM professionals (75 men and 11 women), of which 15 are fully licensed (14 men and 1 woman, i.e., 
7% women among fully licensed staff), the existing fully licensed woman is not a result of project-supported training and 
is therefore not counted in the baseline. 
 
Project target and expected results: Considering the cost and duration of training and certification programs, the MoTCA 
proposes to fully license 20 additional ATM professionals through the Project, of which 10 are expected to be women. By 
the end of the Project, the total number of fully licensed ATM professionals is expected to increase from 15 to 35, and 
the number of fully licensed women from 1 to 11, increasing their share among fully licensed staff from approximately 
7% to 30%. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; Licensing and training records (SCAA licensing unit, inspectorate files) 
to verify that filled posts meet qualification requirements. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
SCAA approved organizational structure and annual staffing plan 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Sustainable Operations and Management  
Flight Information Region coverage and reliability provided by upgraded air navigation systems (Percentage)    
Description 
The indicator measures the proportion of the Somali Flight Information region airspace where upgraded air navigation 
systems (e.g., surveillance, CNS/ATM, VHF/HF/CPDLC communications, navigation aids, ADSB) provide service at or above 
the prescribed performance targets (e.g., availability, accuracy, integrity) for applicable flight levels/routes. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports; System performance logs (availability/uptime), NAVAID monitoring 
systems, ADS-B/radar track coverage reports, VHF coverage surveys, ATM incident logs. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Establish the baseline via pre-upgrade coverage maps and historical availability logs (e.g., AFTN/ATM system logs, 
SNMP/SCADA, maintenance records) for the 12 months prior to upgrades.  
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Improved communication, navigation and surveillance systems (Yes/No)    
Description 
The yes/no indicator is a composite of  the installation of (a) Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast (ADS-B) 
ground stations (ii) Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) network; and (iii) Instrument Landing System for MGQ 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
SAT certificates and SDP/NMS activation logs; validated by supervision consultant. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Civil works completed, equipment installed and configured, timing synchronized, data link established to SDP, Site 
Acceptance Testing (SAT) passed, and the site is visible and health-monitored in the Network/Surveillance Management 
System 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Installation of Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast (ADS-B) ground stations (Number)    
Description 
The number of ADS-B ground stations installed and commissioned into the national surveillance network in accordance 
with approved technical specifications, providing validated reception and backhaul of 1090ES ADS-B messages to the 
surveillance data processor/ATM system. An ADS-B ground station includes antenna(s), receiver(s), RF front-end, 
GPS/GNSS timing, processing unit, power and grounding, shelter/rack, and secure data backhaul integrated with the 
Surveillance Data Processor (SDP) or equivalent system.  
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
SAT certificates and SDP/NMS activation logs; validated by supervision consultant. 
Methodology for Data 
Civil works completed, equipment installed and configured, timing synchronized, data link established to SDP, Site
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 
 
Official Use Only 
Collection  
Acceptance Testing (SAT) passed, and the site is visible and health-monitored in the Network/Surveillance Management 
System 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Installation of Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) network (Number)    
Description 
The number of distinct VSAT ground stations (sites) installed and commissioned into the national ANSP/CAA 
communications network in accordance with the approved technical specifications, providing operational connectivity 
for air navigation or aeronautical administration. A “VSAT site” includes antenna, RF chain (BUC/LNB/modem), indoor 
unit, power and grounding, shelters/racks, and network integration with the hub/NMS. “Installed and commissioned” 
means civil works completed, equipment installed and configured, link established to designated satellite/hub, 
acceptance tests passed, and site entered into the Network Management System (NMS) with an assigned node ID. 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Engineer’s SAT certificates; hub/NMS node activation records; link availability test reports; as-built documentation. 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Civil works completed, equipment installed and configured, timing synchronized, data link established to SDP, Site 
Acceptance Testing (SAT) passed, and the site is visible and health-monitored in the Network/Surveillance Management 
System 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoTCA 
Share of project investments with costed operations and maintenance plans adopted by responsible authority (Percentage) 
Description 
The number of project investments for which O&M plans have been developed which include costing. For measurement 
of this indicator, project investments will be counted by discrete project sites (each airport, road, drainage system). The 
indicator will be considered met when the responsible authority for the specific investment formally adopts the 
operations and maintenance plan.  
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Implementation Unit Monitoring Reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Receipt of communication from responsible authority 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoPWRH, MoTCA 
Sustainable Operations and Management  
Roadmap developed for transition to use of civil servants in project implementation (Yes/No) 
Description 
This indicator measures the achievement in the preparation of a roadmap for transition to the use of civil servants in 
project implementation. This indicator will be considered met when the roadmap has been accepted by the Ministry of 
Finance (as implementing agency of the relevant activity) 
Frequency 
Bi-annual 
Data source 
Project Monitoring Reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Receipt of communication from responsible authority 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoF
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 
 
Official Use Only 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan 
 
 
COUNTRY: Somalia, Federal Republic of  
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 
 
1. The Project will have three implementing agencies: the MoF, MoTCA and the MoPWRH. Teams from 
these Ministries, jointly as a National MPA Coordination Unit, will be responsible for the overall 
implementation of all activities in the Project. Implementation responsibilities by Ministry include:  
• 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) – The MoF is responsible for overall coordination of the MPA, as well as 
implementation of Sub-Component 2.C. Designated project consultants reporting to the MoF will 
include a Program Coordinator, an M&E/Communications Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, and a 
Financial Management Specialist. A dedicated implementation budget will be established as part of 
Component 4 to support the MoF implementation costs.  
• 
Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing (MoPWRH) - For activities in Sub-Components 
1.B and 1.C, the existing SURP-II and SHIIP Project Coordination Units under the MoPWRH will take the 
technical lead in implementation of urban drainage and economic corridors, respectively, through the 
closure of these projects. At that point, the two teams will be consolidated into a unified Project 
Implementation Unit within the Ministry. Sub-components 2.B and relevant activities in 3.B will also 
be led by the MoPWRH. The MoPWRH team will be responsible for the procurement, contract 
management, financial management, E&S risk management, and other implementation aspects of 
these activities. For activities in Sub-component 1.B, which will be directly implemented by the BRA, 
MoPWRH will provide oversight and technical backstopping. For activities in Sub-Component 1.C, the 
MoPWRH will engage a UN partner to deliver activities in Somaliland. A dedicated implementation 
budget will be established as part of Component 4 to support the MoPWRH implementation costs.  
• 
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation (MoTCA)- Air transport activities (including Sub-Components 
1.A, 2.A, 3.A and relevant activities in 3.B) will be led by a Project Implementation Unit to be established 
within the MoTCA, including a Project Coordinator, a Procurement Specialist, E&S specialists, a 
Financial Management Specialist, an Airports Engineer, and an Air Navigation System Specialist. A 
dedicated implementation budget will be established as part of Component 4 to support MoTCA 
implementation costs. 
2. Project governance will be led by two committees: a Ministerial Committee and a Technical Steering 
Committee. The Ministerial Committee, chaired by the Minister of Finance and including the Ministers of 
MoTCA and MoPWRH, and the State Minister of the Office of the Prime Minister, will meet on a bi-annual basis 
to review the overall MPA program progress and set high level direction for ongoing and future phases. Day-
to-day governance will be the responsibility of a Technical Steering Committee led by the DG of the MoF and 
consisting of the DGs of the MoTCA and the MoPWRH, as well as representatives from engaged FMS 
ministries/BRA depending on the agenda, which will meet on a quarterly basis, or more often as required. 
3. The Project will leverage existing capacities in the MoF, the MoPWRH, and city governments, while 
building on a longstanding engagement with the MoTCA. For urban drainage activities, the BRA Project 
Implementation Unit established under the SURP-II project will be leveraged. Where airport project sites align 
(in Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismayo and Garowe), city level PIUs already in place under the SURP-II project may be 
leveraged to support implementation as relevant. Clear tri-partite Memorandums of Understanding will be
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 
 
Official Use Only 
established between FMS and FGS to define roles, responsibilities, and coordination mechanisms, which will 
be reflected in the Project operations manual. The Project will move away from stand‑alone project structures 
and enable a gradual transition to greater reliance on civil servants, supported by upfront transition planning 
during Phase 1 to strengthen long-term sustainability and capacity. See below for further details on 
implementation arrangements.  
Stairs2Jobs Phase 1 Organogram
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Infrastructure Development for Access and Jobs, Phase 1 (P513127) 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 
 
Official Use Only 
ANNEX 2: Project Map
