=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Report No: PADHI01043 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 72.6 MILLION  
(US$95 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND CO-FINANCED BY 
 
A GRANT FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$10 MILLION 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA PRODUCTIVE, RESILIENT, AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH (SPRING) PROJECT 
 
 
APRIL 16, 2025 
 
 
 
Finance, Competitiveness and Investment Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
(Exchange Rate Effective February 28, 2025) 
 
Currency Unit  US$ 
SDR 0.764 = US$1 
US$1.309 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acting Regional Vice President: Amit Dar 
Regional Practice Director: Hassan Zaman 
Division Director: Qimiao Fan 
Practice Manager: Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani 
Task Team Leaders: Sameer Goyal, Milaine Rossanaly, Asta Bareisaite
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AM 
Accountability Mechanism 
AML/CFT 
Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism 
BDS 
Business Development Services 
BoS 
Bank of Somaliland 
CBR 
Correspondent Banking Relationship 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
CE 
Citizen Engagement 
CIS 
Credit Information System 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CPSD 
Country Private Sector Diagnostic 
CRI 
Corporate Results Indicator 
DA 
Designated Account 
DFIL 
Disbursement and Financial Information Letter 
DPA 
Data Protection Authority 
DRIVE 
De-risking, Inclusion, and Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies in the Horn of Africa 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAC 
East African Community 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EBIT 
Earnings before Interest and Taxes 
EIRR 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
e-KYC 
Electronic-Know Your Customer 
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FIF 
Financial Intermediary Financing 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
FRC 
Financial Reporting Center 
FSC 
Financial Stability Committee 
FSI 
Financial Soundness Indicator 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
HLO 
High-Level Objective 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IFC 
International Finance Cooperation 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund
=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IVA 
Independent Verification Agent 
KfW 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (Credit Institute for Reconstruction) 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies 
MFD 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
MFI 
Microfinance Institution 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoCI 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MSMEs 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
NIRA 
National Identification and Registration Authority 
NPL 
Nonperforming Loan 
NPS 
National Payment System 
NRA 
National Risk Assessment 
NTP I 
National Transformation Plan I 
OAG 
Office of the Auditor General 
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
PA 
Paris Alignment  
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition 
PCE 
Private Capital Enabling 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFI 
Participating Financial Institution 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee 
QPR 
Quarterly Progress Report 
RSM 
Risk-Sharing Mechanism 
SACCO 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Society 
SBRS 
Somalia Business Registration System 
SCALED-UP 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift 
Project 
SCRP 
Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
SDRB 
Somali Development and Reconstruction Bank 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
SG 
Strategic Goal 
SIPS 
Somalia Instant Payment System 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
 
 
SPRING 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
WBG 
World Bank Group
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT...................................................................................................... 1 
A. Project Strategic Context ................................................................................................................... 1 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ..................................................................................................... 2 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................... 5 
A. Project Development Objective ........................................................................................................ 5 
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................. 5 
C. Project Beneficiaries .......................................................................................................................... 6 
D. Project Components .......................................................................................................................... 7 
E. Role of Partners ................................................................................................................................ 14 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ..................................................................... 14 
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION......................................................................................... 15 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 15 
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements .................................................. 17 
C. Disbursement Arrangements ........................................................................................................... 17 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 18 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis.................................................................................... 18 
B. Fiduciary ........................................................................................................................................... 22 
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies .................................................................... 23 
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 24 
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 26 
ANNEX 2. ADDITIONAL TABLES ........................................................................................... 40
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
i 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate 
DATASHEET 
BASIC INFORMATION 
Project 
Beneficiary(ies) 
Operation Name 
Somalia 
Somalia productive, resilient, and inclusive growth (SPRING) project 
Operation ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
 
P501662 
Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) 
Substantial 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
07-May-2025 
30-Jun-2030 
Bank/IFC Collaboration 
Joint Level 
Yes 
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
Promote private sector-led growth and job creation by improving the business-enabling environment, strengthening 
the financial system, and enhancing access to finance 
Components 
Component Name 
Cost (US$)
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
ii 
 
Comp. 1: Improving the enabling environment for the private sector 
36,000,000.00 
Comp. 2: Deepening financial sector reforms and strengthening institutional 
capacity 
37,500,000.00 
Comp. 3: Enhancing access to finance and resilience for MSMEs 
25,500,000.00 
Comp. 4: Project Management  
6,000,000.00 
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate 
  
Organizations 
 
 Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia 
 Contact 
Title 
Telephone No. 
Email 
 Implementing Agency:  
 Ministry of Finance 
 Contact 
Title 
Telephone No. 
Email 
 Saleiman S.Umar 
Director General 
+252 61 3959999 
dg@mof.gov.so 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?  
Yes 
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)? 
Yes 
 
SUMMARY 
Total Operation Cost 
105.00  
Total Financing 
105.00  
of which IBRD/IDA 
95.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00  
DETAILS 
World Bank Group Financing 
   
International Development Association (IDA) 
95.00 
IDA Grant 
95.00
=== PAGE 9 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
iii 
 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
   
Trust Funds 
10.00 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
10.00 
IDA Resources (US$, Millions) 
  
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
95.00 
0.00 
0.00 
95.00 
Total 
0.00 
95.00 
0.00 
0.00 
95.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate 
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions) 
WB Fiscal 
Year 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
Annual 
5.00 
22.50 
22.50 
25.00 
15.00 
12.50 
2.50 
Cumulative 
5.00 
27.50 
50.00 
75.00 
90.00 
102.50 
105.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate 
PRACTICE AREA(S) 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation 
Digital Development 
CLIMATE 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
iv 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫   High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫   High 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫   Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫   Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫   Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫   Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫   Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫   Substantial 
9. Overall 
⚫   High 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate 
POLICY COMPLIANCE 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts 
Relevant 
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety 
Relevant
=== PAGE 11 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
v 
 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved 
Traditional Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries 
Relevant 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate 
LEGAL 
Legal Covenants 
Sections and Description 
i. Section I.A.1(a) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement Establish not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective 
Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the period of Project implementation, a Project steering committee (“Project 
Steering Committee”): (i) chaired by the Director General of the Ministry of Finance, and comprised of Director General 
of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI), General Manager of CBS, Director of FRC, Director General of NIRA, 
Chief Executive Officer of Gargaara and other stakeholders as set forth in the POM; and (ii) vested with such powers, 
functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set forth in the POM, as shall be required to: (A) provide 
support to the PIU addressing any obstacles to Project implementation; (B) provide policy direction and guidance to the 
PIU for the carrying out of the Project; (C) promote inter-agencies and federal collaboration, coordination, and 
cooperation for Project activities; and (D) review and approve the Annual Work Plans and Budgets and Project Reports.  
ii. Section I.B.2(b)(ii) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement Without limitation to the provisions of sub-paragraph (a) 
immediately above, the Recipient shall: (ii) not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date, enter into a legal 
agreement acceptable to the Association, with the MSME Financing Facility, setting out the respective roles and 
responsibilities of the MoF and the MSME Financing Facility, as may be further provided in the POM.  
iii. Section II.B.1(a) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement Without limitation to the provisions of Part A of this 
Section II, for purposes of implementation of the PBCs under Part 2.2(a)(ii) of Schedule 1 to this Agreement, the 
Recipient shall: (a) not later than nine (9) months after the Effective Date, appoint and enter into a verification 
agreement with a Verification Agency, under terms of reference satisfactory to the Association 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate 
Conditions 
Type 
Citation 
Description 
Financing Source 
Effectiveness 
Section 4.01 of Article IV of 
the Financing Agreement  
(a) the Recipient has 
prepared and adopted the 
Project Operations Manual 
in form and substance 
satisfactory to the 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 12 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
vi 
 
Association; and (b) the 
SMPF Grant Agreement has 
been duly executed and 
delivered, and all 
conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness, or to the 
right of the Recipient to 
make withdrawals under it 
(other than the 
effectiveness of this 
Agreement), have been 
fulfilled.  
Effectiveness 
Section 4.01 of Article IV to 
the Grant Agreement  
(a) the Recipient has 
prepared and adopted the 
Project Operations Manual 
in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Bank; 
and (b) the Financing 
Agreement has been duly 
executed and delivered, 
and all conditions 
precedent to its 
effectiveness, or to the 
right of the Recipient to 
make withdrawals under it 
(other than the 
effectiveness of this 
Agreement), have been 
fulfilled.  
Trust Funds 
Disbursement 
Section III.B.1(b) of 
Schedule 2 to the Financing 
Agreement 
No withdrawal shall be 
made under Category (2) 
unless and until the 
Recipient has put in place 
as part of its legal regime, 
(i) a national law governing 
payment systems, and (ii) a 
revised law governing the 
CBS.  
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Section III.B.1(c) of 
Schedule 2 to the Financing 
Agreement 
No withdrawal shall be 
made under Category (3) 
unless and until Somaliland 
has: (i) executed the 
Somaliland Subsidiary 
Agreement setting forth 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 13 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
vii 
 
implementation 
arrangements for 
Somaliland’s Respective 
Activities under the Project 
(including the flow of funds 
out of the Financing 
proceeds) and all 
Somaliland’s internal 
requirements for the 
agreement to be binding 
upon Somaliland in 
accordance with its terms 
have been duly 
obtained/secured; (ii) 
prepared and formally 
adopted the Somaliland 
Manual for its Respective 
Activities under the Project; 
(iii) established the 
institutional arrangements 
set forth in the foregoing 
manual, as shall be 
required for carrying out its 
Respective Activities under 
the Project, and (iv) 
prepared, adopted and 
disclosed its environmental 
and social commitment 
plan, including the 
environmental & social risk 
management documents; 
in a manner and substance 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
Disbursement 
Section III.B.1(d) of 
Schedule 2 to the Financing 
Agreement 
No withdrawal shall be 
made under Category (4) 
with respect to each PBC, 
as set forth in Schedule 3, 
for which a withdrawal 
request has been 
submitted, until and unless 
the Recipient has also 
submitted: (i) evidence, in 
form and substance 
IBRD/IDA
=== PAGE 14 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
viii 
 
satisfactory to the 
Association, of the Eligible 
PBC Expenditures paid, as 
presented in the IFR and 
verified pursuant to the 
POM; and (ii) supporting 
documentation confirming 
the Recipient’s 
achievement of the 
respective PBC(s) in form 
and substance satisfactory 
to the Association, as 
further elaborated in 
Schedule 3 and as set forth 
in the Verification Protocol, 
including, but not limited 
to, a report issued by the 
Verification Agent, 
confirming the 
achievement of the 
respective PBC or PBCs and 
the amount to be paid.
=== PAGE 15 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 1  
 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Project Strategic Context 
 
1. 
The Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project aims to catalyze private sector-led 
growth in Somalia by addressing systemic barriers and key binding constraints that most critically hinder economic 
development. Building on the foundations laid by ongoing World Bank Group (WBG) analytical activities and World Bank-
financed operations, the project seeks to address cross-cutting constraints that hamper private sector development in the 
country. The engagement is particularly critical given Somalia’s urgent need for broad-based and resilient private-sector-
led growth. While the country has made notable progress in normalizing political processes, rebuilding public institutions, 
and implementing key reforms,1 their sustainability requires that more inclusive economic dividends are generated for 
the Somali population, particularly in the current context of scarce opportunities and extreme vulnerability.2 Addressing 
these challenges will require the private sector to play a pivotal role, particularly given the constrained fiscal space and 
limited institutional capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS).3 However, the private sector remains 
underdeveloped and unable to drive structural transformation due to a ‘missing middle’, low productivity, and minimal 
economic integration. These challenges stem from institutional and regulatory weaknesses,4 underperformance in 
enabling sectors (for example, financial services),5 and insufficient resilience across key value chains. 
2. 
Two mutually reinforcing interventions are essential for establishing a strong foundation for structural 
transformation in the medium to long term. First, advancing legitimate, effective, and equitable formal institutional and 
regulatory frameworks is critical. This requires prioritizing initiatives to strengthen the business-enabling environment, 
including addressing legal, regulatory, and institutional gaps for private sector development; supporting trade integration 
efforts; and scaling up digital ID enrollment to enhance service access and delivery. Second, diversifying Somalia’s 
economy into higher-value-added activities and promoting quality jobs depend on stronger business enabling sector 
reforms. In this regard, strengthening financial sector stability, efficiency, and inclusion is crucial. 
3. 
Since structural and regulatory reforms take time to generate economic growth and job creation in fragile 
contexts such as Somalia, it is also critical to implement targeted value chain development interventions to avoid 
backsliding. Focusing on sectors with potential for productivity gains—such as livestock, crops, and fisheries—can 
stimulate economic opportunities, reduce poverty, and reinforce broader reforms. Additionally, this will foster trust and 
collaboration among stakeholders, enabling collective action against predation and rent-seeking while strengthening 
supply chains for higher-value-added activities. To this end, the operation will focus on derisking financing to expand 
access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), particularly in vulnerable sectors and for women-
led businesses, while providing business development services (BDS) to lay the groundwork for resilient and inclusive 
growth. 
 
1 World Bank. 2024. “Somalia Country Private Sector Diagnostic.” World Bank Group.  
2 Poverty is widespread and high with an estimated 54 percent of the Somali population living below the national poverty line of US$754 per person in 2022. Job 
generation in the country is considerably low, and most economic activity is informal with the percentage of informal jobs in Somalia estimated to be above 91 percent. 
Somali women are particularly disadvantaged, with gender gaps in employment and labor force, with participation rates of around 21 and 23 percent, respectively. 
3 World Bank. 2021. “Domestic Resource Mobilization in Somalia.” Washington, DC; IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2023. Somalia: IMF Staff Report for the Sixth 
Review Under the Extended Credit Facility. 
4 In a context of institutional weakness, firms that lack social and political networks endure a more burdensome business environment. This is particularly so for women-
owned businesses, which are generally excluded from existing political and clan-based networks because of the patriarchal structure of Somali society. 
5 World Bank. 2022. “Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government—Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper (English).” World Bank 
Group, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 16 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 2  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. 
Somalia’s private and financial sectors remain central to the country’s economy. The private sector accounts for 
an estimated 95 percent of total job creation in Somalia and has been the primary driver of economic growth,6 consistently 
outpacing the average rates of Sub-Saharan Africa and fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) affected countries since 2012.7 
It also serves as the main provider of goods and services, including those traditionally delivered by the state. The country 
holds immense potential for growth due to its abundant natural resources (for example, hydrocarbons, minerals, 
renewable energy potential) as well as its strategic location as a potential gateway to international markets. Meanwhile, 
the financial sector is playing an increasingly pivotal role in the economy. From 2018 to 2023, total assets and customer 
deposits at commercial banks more than quadrupled,8 private transfers and remittances grew by 36 percent between 
2019 and 2022, and mobile money usage expanded significantly, with 97 percent of surveyed households reporting access 
to mobile money or wallets, according to the National Bureau of Statistics. 
5. 
Significant progress has been made through various World Bank engagements. Through the Somalia Country 
Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD, 607500), the Supporting Financial Inclusion and Private Sector-led Recovery in Somalia 
(P179247), and the Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift 
Project (SCALED-UP, P168115), the World Bank has supported the achievement of key milestones, including the 
enactment of various business-enabling laws and regulations, significant capacity-building efforts at key institutions, the 
rollout of the Somalia National Payment System (NPS), the introduction of the foundational digital ID system (with nearly 
100,000 registrations completed), the deployment of the Somalia Business Registration System (SBRS) (with over 5,000 
businesses registered), and the establishment of the Gargaara MSME financing facility (which has cumulatively disbursed 
more than US$27 million to over 1,900 MSMEs). Complementary efforts, such as the Somalia Financial System Initiative 
(P177665) and the Somalia Second Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation (P179307), are advancing private 
sector reforms and aligning financial institutions with global systems. Sector-specific projects, including the De-risking, 
Inclusion, and Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies in the Horn of Africa (DRIVE, P176517), the Somali Sustainable 
Fisheries Development Project – Badmaal (P178032), and the Food Systems Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern 
Africa (Phase 3) (P177816), are strengthening productive sectors, while the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (SCRP, 
P173315) is rebuilding infrastructure in flood- and drought-affected regions. Additional initiatives addressing gaps in 
energy, transport, information and communication technology (ICT), education, and water are collectively driving 
resilience and sustainable growth in Somalia. 
6. 
However, a range of challenges to private sector development remain unaddressed. Regulatory and institutional 
frameworks for private sector development in Somalia are still underdeveloped and fragmented, posing significant 
barriers to growth. The Somalia CPSD noted the need for “deepening reforms to establish legitimate, effective, and 
equitable formal institutions and regulatory frameworks for private sector-led growth” as a key recommendation to unlock 
private-sector-led growth in Somalia. Further efforts are needed to implement a unified and harmonized business 
registration and licensing system across the country, building on the existing SBRS. Somalia also needs to take steps to 
better align the country’s investment policy and promotion and public-private partnership frameworks with best practices. 
In line with experiences from other FCV countries, institutional capacity building at key institutions for private sector 
development remains a priority. 
7. 
Lack of access to finance also continues to be a major challenge for private sector development notwithstanding 
recent advancements.9 While there are now more than 60 financial institutions providing basic services such as retail 
banking, money transfers, mobile money, and insurance, banking penetration in Somalia remains low, with less than 10 
 
6 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
7 World Development Indicators, 2023. 
8 Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, December 2023. 
9 Financial sector development has been prioritized in the CPSD given its critical role for Somalia’s development.
=== PAGE 17 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 3  
 
percent adults holding accounts.10 Credit to the private sector, at under 5 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) as 
of December 2023,11 is constrained by banks’ risk aversion, collateral concerns, and preference for holding cash. As a 
result, 77 percent of businesses report being credit constrained, with 95 percent of larger firms relying on internal funds.12 
This situation is even worse for women-led enterprises, which not only identify access to finance more frequently as a 
significant challenge but are also less likely to apply for or receive approval for loans from financial institutions. 
8. 
Financial sector oversight and infrastructure remain nascent, despite institutions such as the Central Bank of 
Somalia (CBS) and the Financial Reporting Center (FRC) gradually building capacity. Key financial laws and regulations 
remain pending, with related regulation and policies yet to be developed, thus leaving large oversight gaps. FRC also needs 
stronger enforcement capacity to address financial integrity risks that limit integration with global systems and foreign 
investment.13 Despite progress in the NPS, gaps in the interoperability of credit and debit transactions remain, and the 
lack of credit reporting and derisking mechanisms continue to hinder lending. SCALED-UP supported the FRC completion 
of the National Risk Assessment (NRA), as well as broader capacity-building efforts at FRC, yet the NRA action plan is yet 
to be fully implemented, and capacity gaps at FRC remain. 
9. 
Gargaara, Somalia’s first apex MSME financing facility, was established by the FGS with the support of SCALED-
UP in 2019. It has made significant strides toward reaching full financial and institutional sustainability, and the remaining 
steps will be completed with the support planned under this project. As Gargaara continues to work towards full 
operationalization of core functions, discussions continue within FGS regarding its capitalization and long-term 
sustainability, including it having an institutional home in the recently revived Somali Development and Reconstruction 
Bank (SDRB). In parallel, efforts are ongoing to strengthen Somalia’s broader development finance landscape with a focus 
on supporting the National Transformation Plan I (NTP I) 2025–29, and efforts are underway to operationalize the SDRB. 
However, expanding credit to priority sectors continues to remain constrained by weak governance, risk management, 
and systems capacity of financial institutions, leading to their limited risk appetite to engage in these areas. 
10. 
Over the past years, CBS has made significant progress toward becoming a policy-oriented and functionally 
organized institution, adopting a new organizational structure and making staffing development a core focus of 
attention. Internal systems at the CBS have been overhauled and modernized, a full suite of internal policies, procedures, 
and manuals have been developed, and internal controls were strengthened, leading to repeated achievement of a clean 
external audit opinion. Outreach to Federal Member States (FMS) is also being enhanced, including through the 
establishment of new CBS branch offices. The CBS board recently approved the CBS Strategy 2025–2029 that identifies 
key reform priorities organized around the four strategic goals (SGs) of the new strategy: (a) SG1: Issue a viable national 
currency and develop, implement, and continuously assess effective monetary and foreign exchange policies; (b) SG2: 
Strengthen the financial system’s stability, effectiveness, and inclusiveness; (c) SG3: Enhance the financial market 
infrastructure to ensure payment systems and services are safe and efficient; and (d) SG4: Promote good governance, 
institutional resilience, and operational excellence. 
11. 
The Bank of Somaliland (BoS) was established in 1994 to operate as a Central Bank, and it is guided by the 
Somaliland Constitution. The BoS manages monetary and foreign exchange policies and licenses, regulates, and 
supervises operations of financial institutions in Somaliland. Its strategic plan for 2023–2025 focuses on maintaining and 
promoting monetary stability, financial stability, and NPS stability. Though its central banking capacity has not been 
recognized by the FGS and CBS, it continues to operate in that capacity in the absence of CBS presence in Somaliland. 
Building consensus around key reforms and developing harmonized systems and standards—between the FGS and FMS 
 
10 Compared to 39 percent in low-income countries and 55 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank. 2022. “The Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion 2022.” World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
11 International Monetary Fund. 2024. Staff Report for the First Review Under the Extended Credit Facility, and Requests for Modification of Performance Criteria. IMF 
Country Report No. 24/158. 
12 World Bank. Forthcoming. “Somalia Business Survey – Quantitative and Qualitative Report.”. 
13 Federal Government of Somalia. 2022. “National Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing.”. While the NRA identified threats and vulnerabilities 
and supported the development of a roadmap, the implementation has been slow.
=== PAGE 18 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 4  
 
and at the local level—is essential for a coordinated development of financial systems and regional economic development 
and is, thus, being given high priority by all governments. 
12. 
Somalia’s private sector faces significant challenges, including due to a lack of climate resilience, which hampers 
its ability to grow and contribute meaningfully to the economy. Somalia is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate 
change globally. Approximately two-thirds of the country’s population reported having experienced at least one shock in 
2021–2022 that severely affected their economic situation. This vulnerability is likely to worsen as the Somali climate is 
expected to change, with increasing temperatures (estimated up to 3°C by the end of the century) as well as erratic and 
extreme rainfalls. In those circumstances, Somali firms in key sectors such as agriculture, livestock, and fisheries face 
considerable challenges. These sectors, which form the backbone of the Somali productive sector, are especially 
vulnerable because they lack the infrastructure, financial support, and technological innovations needed to withstand 
such shocks. MSMEs often operate with limited knowledge of, and access to, resources such as climate-resilient 
technologies, early warning systems, or derisking options that could help them adapt to and mitigate the risks of 
environmental disruptions. Moreover, weak infrastructure (for example, for water management) and fragmented 
regulatory frameworks exacerbate the challenges for these enterprises, limiting their ability to adapt to climate change. 
In the meantime, as noted in the Somalia CPSD, growth in these priority value chains is critical to bring short- to medium-
term dividends in terms of creating inclusive jobs and reducing poverty. 
13. 
Women engaged in economic activities face disproportionate challenges in Somalia, especially since many are 
engaged in climate-vulnerable subsistence production and are particularly affected by issues with limited access to 
finance and access to markets/networks. Somalia’s overall Women, Business, and the Law14 score is 46.9 points out of 
100, 23 points below the Sub-Saharan African average of 69.9 points. Key issues include the absence of legal protection 
against gender-based discrimination in access to credit, no legislation prohibiting sexual harassment in the workplace, and 
restrictions on women working at night and in certain industries. 
14. 
To address these challenges, the SPRING Project will focus on strengthening foundational building blocks critical 
for private-sector-led equitable growth in Somalia. In alignment with the Somali Government’s prioritization of targeted 
interventions to promote a more inclusive and sustainable economic growth trajectory, the project will implement several 
reinforcing measures. To improve the enabling environment for the private sector, reforms will focus on strengthening 
institutional and regulatory frameworks, as well as on expanding the rollout of the digital ID across Somalia to support 
service delivery. To enhance financial sector stability, integrity, and access to financial services, the project will continue 
support for financial sector reforms in Somalia. Lastly, to strengthen the resilience of MSME clusters in key economic 
sectors, the operation will derisk financing to MSMEs, particularly in productive and climate-vulnerable sectors, through 
risk-sharing mechanisms (RSMs) and other innovative products that maximize financing for development by mobilizing 
private capital, while bolstering firms’ capacity to climate-proof their operations through BDS and targeted adaptation 
interventions. The project includes dedicated support to improve women’s access to ID, business registration services, 
and finance through specific measures under Components 1–3, thereby narrowing the gender gap in each area and 
alleviating critical constraints on women’s economic activities, including entrepreneurship as enumerated in the gender 
section of this document. 
15. 
In doing so, this project will contribute to the World Bank’s mission to end extreme poverty and boost shared 
prosperity on a livable planet. The project is aligned with the WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federal 
Republic of Somalia for the Period FY24–28 (Report Number 187254-SO), discussed by the Board of Executive Directors 
on February 29, 2024. It contributes to the CPF High-Level Objective (HLO) 1: Inclusive, private sector-led job creation and 
economic growth which aims to support productive small and medium enterprises (SMEs), enhance financial inclusion, 
improve the business and investment climate, and invest in critical infrastructure, and HLO 3: Greater resilience to climatic 
 
14 Women, Business, and the Law is an index structured around the economic decisions women make as they go through different stages of their working lives. It 
measures eight indicator scores on a scale of 0–100, with 100 representing the best score overall.
=== PAGE 19 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 5  
 
and other shocks which aims to increase the resilience of urban and rural populations in the context of extreme 
vulnerability to climate change, straining infrastructure, and persistent drought and floods undermining rural livelihoods 
and food security. The project also contributes to the cross-cutting foundational HLO: Macroeconomic stability and 
governance foundations, in particular Objective 0.1: Increase the effectiveness, transparency, and accountability of 
institutions and Objective 1.1: Strengthen financial inclusion and growth. The project is also aligned with the 2023 
Systematic Country Diagnostic Update,15 supporting in particular HLO 5: Enhanced Private Sector for Better Jobs and HLO 
3: Improved Household Resilience to Shocks. It also directly contributes to Somalia’s NTP I 2025–2029 under the pillars of 
Sustainable Economic Transformation and Environment and Climate Resilience which prioritize financial stability, 
strengthening financial market infrastructure and enhancement of financial services for better financial inclusion. The 
support to Somaliland will promote a more harmonized development of financial systems across the FGS and Somaliland. 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
16. 
The project development objective (PDO) is to promote private sector-led growth and job creation by improving 
the business-enabling environment, strengthening the financial system, and enhancing access to finance.16 
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators 
 
17. 
To achieve the PDO, the project promotes economic development by addressing critical constraints to Somalia’s 
private sector development with a cumulative impact on the overall enhancement of economic activity and the promotion 
of job creation. It strengthens the business-enabling environment, through improvements to regulatory and institutional 
frameworks, and the rollout of a digital ID system to enable secure transactions and efficient service delivery. In parallel, 
the project aims to enhance stability, oversight, and access to finance, through the implementation of financial sector 
reforms, and the creation of an RSM to derisk financing to businesses. Relatedly, the project will support improvements 
to firm performance, market access, and competitiveness as well as address firm vulnerability to external shocks through 
the provision of BDS to MSMEs in key economic sectors. 
 
15 World Bank. 2023. “Somalia Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: Accelerating the Building of Inclusive Institutions for Resilience and Jobs.” World Bank Group.  
16 For the purposes of this project, private-sector-led growth means economic growth that is primarily driven by the private sector, and job creation means the broad 
generation of new employment opportunities (including better jobs) linked to specific interventions under this project. Improving the business-enabling environment 
is understood as positively changing the laws, policies, regulations, systems, and services that facilitate the conduct of private and financial sector activity in the country. 
Strengthening the financial system means adopting new reforms and supporting the development of institutions for the financial sector, and enhancing access to 
finance is understood as creating means for select businesses/priority segments to benefit from loans through credit enhancements.
=== PAGE 20 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 6  
 
Figure 1. Theory of Change 
 
PDO Indicators 
• 
Number of new firms benefitting from reformed business registration requirements (of which are women-
owned, percentage) (OI1) 
• 
People with digitally verifiable identification (number, of which are women) (OI2) 
• 
Number of new bank accounts opened (OI3) 
• 
Number of businesses accessing credit with the support of the RSM17 (OI4) 
• 
Number of jobs created through the RSM and BDS18 (OI5). 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
18. 
The project is targeting Somali MSMEs and individuals (5,000,000 people, 26 percent of total population) as 
direct beneficiaries benefitting from an improved business environment, increased access to financial services, and 
enhanced access to services and jobs. Through a streamlined business-enabling environment and financial sector reforms, 
the project aims to promote private sector development and resilience and enable job creation cumulatively. Key 
 
17 This indicator is linked to the World Bank Corporate Results Indicator (CRI): People and businesses using financial services. 
18 This indicator is linked to the World Bank CRI: New or better jobs.
=== PAGE 21 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 7  
 
institutions, such as the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the CBS, will gain from capacity building and the strengthening of 
institutional and regulatory frameworks. This holistic approach—combining business environment reforms, financial 
infrastructure, derisking of access to finance to priority and vulnerable sectors, and measures to improve economic 
resilience—will support more inclusive and sustainable economic development in the country. By addressing systemic 
gaps and supporting MSMEs, the project ensures that Somalia’s private sector is well-positioned to capitalize on new 
opportunities in a more sustainable manner. These improvements are expected to translate into increased revenues, 
profits, and job creation, directly benefiting individuals through new and improved employment opportunities. 
D. Project Components 
 
19. 
The US$105 million project will continue strengthening foundational building blocks critical for private-sector-
led growth, enabling job creation cumulatively. The project includes four reinforcing components (Table 1). The project 
design will leverage performance-based conditions (PBCs) to further incentivize reforms and results, as appropriate, and 
follows the World Bank Guidance on Financial Intermediary Financing (FIF). The project will be funded by a US$95 million 
equivalent IDA grant and a US$10 million grant from the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF). 
Table 1. Project Components Cost Breakdown (US$, million) 
Components 
International 
Development 
Association (IDA) Costs 
Somalia Multi-
Partner Fund 
(SMPF) Costs 
Total 
Component 1: Improving the enabling environment for the private sector 
32.0 
4.0 
36.0 
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening institutional and regulatory 
framework for the private sector 
11.0 
— 
11.0 
Subcomponent 1.2: Enhancing the Somali ID System 
21.0 
4.0 
25.0 
Component 2: Deepening financial sector reforms and strengthening 
institutional capacity 
31.5 
6.0 
37.5 
Subcomponent 2.1: Operational and capacity-building support to 
Gargaara 
4.0 
2.0 
6.0 
Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening financial sector stability, integrity, 
and infrastructurea 
27.5 
4.0 
31.5 
Component 3: Enhancing access to finance and resilience for MSMEs 
25.5 
— 
25.5 
Subcomponent 3.1: Derisking access to finance for MSMEs 
14.5 
— 
14.5 
Subcomponent 3.2: Enhancing MSMEs’ resilience 
11.0 
— 
11.0 
Component 4: Project Management 
6.0 
— 
6.0 
Total 
95.0 
10.0 
105.0 
Note: a. SMPF funding will not be used against PBCs. 
Component 1: Improving the enabling environment for the private sector (US$36 million, of which US$32 million 
equivalent IDA and US$4 million SMPF) 
20. 
This component will help address the key gaps in the business-enabling environment as well as strengthen 
institutions and infrastructure to promote private sector-led growth in Somalia. 
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening institutional and regulatory framework for the private sector (US$11 million 
equivalent IDA) 
21. 
The subcomponent will address institutional and regulatory gaps that hinder business growth, efficiency, and 
competition as well as market access, particularly for MSMEs and women-owned businesses. Building upon the legal
=== PAGE 22 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 8  
 
and regulatory reforms initiated under SCALED-UP, this subcomponent will support the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry (MoCI) to introduce new laws and regulations as well as review procedures to streamline the business licensing 
and registration process. It will also harmonize, upgrade, and raise awareness of the online business registration and 
licensing system, known as the SBRS, across federal institutions and FMS, both at the regional and municipal levels. Overall, 
these reforms reduce administrative barriers, simplify procedures, expand the SBRS coverage, and make registration more 
accessible, increasing the number of formally registered firms. These improvements are critical to help firms unlock access 
to finance, improve business development support, and strengthen risk mitigation mechanisms, among others. This 
subcomponent will also support activities aiming at facilitating the registration of women-owned businesses particularly 
through the interventions focused on micro and small business-related reforms as well as awareness raising. Women-
owned businesses in Somalia are often informal and have limited growth opportunities as a result. Additionally, the 
subcomponent will build strategic capacity for private sector development by fostering effective public-private 
cooperation to drive reforms. Finally, by aligning business regulatory reforms with trade-related legal, regulatory, and 
capacity-building measures, the project will enhance competitiveness by connecting value chains and improving market 
access through Somalia’s integration into regional and global markets. Such support may encompass activities to enable 
full integration within the East African Community (EAC), as well as accession to the African Continental Free Trade Area 
and the World Trade Organization. This would expand opportunities for businesses, contribute to their resilience and 
reinforce Somalia’s participations in regional, continental, and international trade.  
Subcomponent 1.2: Enhancing the Somali ID System (US$25 million, of which US$21 million equivalent IDA and US$4 
million SMPF) 
22. 
This subcomponent will build on and scale up ongoing activities supported under SCALED-UP to further 
strengthen Somalia’s foundational digital ID system.19 The ID system can serve as a true enabler for economic 
opportunities and innovation in the private sector—facilitating the opening of bank accounts, accessing credit, introducing 
digital financial services, promoting business registration, and making available verifiable educational credentials. For this 
to happen, more people need to be registered in the system and more service providers need to be on-boarded to use 
digital ID verification options offered by the ID system. To this end, the project will help provide an additional 5 million 
people with unique and digitally verifiable IDs nationwide, free of charge, with a special focus on reaching women 
beneficiaries to close the identification gender gap (in February 2025, 27 women were registered out of a hundred, as 
compared to 73 men). It will also support maximizing the use of the ID for inclusive and efficient service delivery in the 
private and public sectors, including to enable rapid response to climate shocks. The project will achieve these objectives 
by financing the following: 
• 
Registration scale-up. Logistics expenditures and operational support necessary to expand ID registration across 
Somalia, including temporary registration staff, equipment purchase, large-scale outreach and communication 
campaigns, and the issuance of five million additional ID cards, as well as the continued deployment of effective 
customer feedback and grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs). Targeted interventions will support greater 
enrollment among vulnerable segments of the population (including women, internally displaced people, and rural 
communities), building on the lessons learned from the initial registration approach. 
• 
Identity management system update and maintenance. An assessment of and, where required, updating of the 
current identity management system, including for more effective de-duplication, enhanced data hosting, and the 
development and/or integration of new modules, to enable more people-centric and secure identity management.20 
 
19 The necessary legal and regulatory framework has been developed, and an inclusive implementation strategy has been elaborated, along with the building of core 
capacity for the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) and equipping of several registration centers (including mobile registration units) through 
SCALED-UP support. 
20 Including iris as an additional biometric modality may be considered if initial assessment supports its operational feasibility and cost-effectiveness is clarified in the 
Somali context.
=== PAGE 23 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 9  
 
• 
Integration of the ID with high-impact services. Continued development of digital identity verification services and 
hands-on integration for high-impact services (such as telecommunications, banking [to enable electronic-Know Your 
Customer (e-KYC)] and passport services) as well as for the unified social registry/social protection programs (to 
ensure transparency and minimize leakages) with the objective of promoting efficiency and accountability in service 
delivery. The integration of the digital ID with the unified social registry and social protection programs will, among 
others, improve the FGS’s ability to better coordinate and expand social assistance programs, including to address 
the impacts of climate change.21 The project will also support the FGS to achieve mutual recognition and 
interoperability of Somalia’s national ID within the EAC and with other national IDs within the community, including 
to leverage Somalia’s ID as a form of travel document within East Africa and facilitate Somalis’ ability to conduct 
business abroad, thus enhancing mobility, facilitating cross-border trade, and contributing to regional integration. 
• 
Institutional development and capacity building for the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). 
Continued enhancements of policy and regulatory frameworks to support the inclusive and trusted registration and 
identity management, capacity-building support to NIRA, and local and international stakeholder engagement to 
build trust in and broad-based support for the ID system’s implementation. 
23. 
The scale-up of the foundational digital ID system via SPRING Project will be implemented in alignment with 
Somalia’s digital guardrails, including the cybersecurity and data protection frameworks, institutions, and capabilities. 
SCALED-UP has supported the creation of Somalia’s data protection capabilities through the development of the Data 
Protection Law (adopted in March 2023), the creation of the Data Protection Authority (DPA) in 2024, and ongoing 
operationalization and capacity building of the DPA since then. It has also supported the strengthening of Somalia’s 
cybersecurity capabilities, including through ongoing support for the establishment of the country’s first Computer 
Security Incident Response Team and the development of the related legal framework. The World Bank is also providing 
support to the FGS for cybersecurity and data protection through the Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project 
(P176181) to strengthen local capacity to detect, respond to, and mitigate evolving cyber threats and cybercrimes; support 
the implementation of the forthcoming cybersecurity legal and strategic frameworks; and enhance operationalization of 
the DPA. 
Component 2: Deepening financial sector reforms and strengthening institutional capacity (US$37.5 million, of which 
US$31.5 million equivalent IDA and US$6 million SMPF) 
24. 
This component will focus on strengthening financial sector stability, integrity, and infrastructure, as well as 
institutional capacity building to promote resilient private sector development and facilitate the economic transformation 
of the country. 
Subcomponent 2.1: Operational and capacity-building support to Gargaara (US$6 million, of which US$4 million 
equivalent IDA and US$2 million SMPF) 
25. 
This subcomponent will address the key remaining capacity gaps at Gargaara building on activities supported 
through SCALED-UP. Specifically the project will: (a) continue supporting Gargaara in completing the remaining 
institutional-building steps toward achieving full operationalization of core functions, including enhanced appraisals of 
participating financial institutions (PFIs) and advanced monitoring and evaluation (M&E, including for institutional 
development plans of PFIs and expanded product offerings); (b) finance operating expenses for it to reach breakeven point 
in terms of revenues and expenses (expected by 2027–2028); and (c) continue non-lending support programs for 
participating banks and microfinance institutions (MFIs) to strengthen their institutional capabilities including targeted 
training to support lending and other services and to reinforce the gender-inclusive and climate-informed approaches. 
 
21 This measure can be achieved by offering simplified identity verification during onboarding and improved targeting through better data on the age(s) and geographic 
distribution of potential beneficiaries, thus enabling the efficient delivery of shock-responsive cash transfers, especially for climate-change-related shocks.
=== PAGE 24 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 10  
 
The support to Gargaara will be closely coordinated with the BDS for SMEs and RSM program planned as part of the project 
under Component 3.  
Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening financial sector stability, integrity, and infrastructure (US$31.5 million, of which 
US$27.5 million equivalent IDA and US$4 million SMPF) 
26. 
This subcomponent will support the CBS, FRC, and BoS in strengthening the financial sector regulatory and 
supervisory framework and its enforcement, developing and implementing sector-specific policies, and building related 
institutional capacity and infrastructure. 
(a) 
CBS (US$25 million). This subcomponent will support the CBS in carrying out a program of reforms which closely 
align with the CBS Strategy 2025–2029 and the Government’s approach to developing the financial sector and 
markets in Somalia. While some of the activities will be channeled through input-based Investment Project Financing 
(IPF), others are structured to be disbursed conditionally upon achievement of PBCs as provided in Table 2. 
(i) 
Strengthening financial sector oversight and policy implementation (US$14 million) 
A. 
Regulatory framework strengthening (US$3 million). Several critical financial sector laws and/or 
amendments to existing laws are expected to be enacted in 2025. (1) The Financial Institutions law (new), 
Insurance law (new), and the Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) 
(amendments) law have already been approved by the Parliament. (2) The NPS (new) and Central Bank 
(amendments) laws are also in late stages of clearance and expected to be enacted. The project will support 
the CBS in upgrading and strengthening the related implementing guidelines and regulations, including for 
the Targeted Financial Sanctions Act. 
B. 
Framework for depositor and consumer protection (US$1 million). Development of legal, regulatory, and 
institutional frameworks for depositor protection and consumer protection will also be supported. 
C. 
Enhancing supervision capacity and market development framework (US$4 million). The project will support 
strengthening of supervision of the financial sector and build CBS enforcement capacity. It will support the 
development and implementation of frameworks and policies for financial market stability, depth, and 
intermediation including through support for the development and implementation of the financial sector 
roadmap, a framework for climate finance for financial institutions and related financial products and services, 
and a financial inclusion strategy, with focus on enhancing access to affordable and secure financial services 
(including digital) for underserved and unbanked populations as well as attention to gender. 
D. 
CBS institutional capacity (US$6 million). CBS will enhance the economic advisory function through 
strengthening capabilities for related data collection and policy development. Capacity for foreign exchange 
reserves management and efficient and secure future currency management operations will be supported to 
enhance market operations. In particular, institutional capacity development support is envisaged to 
strengthen coordination with FMS for more effective oversight and enhanced implementation of financial 
sector reforms to promote a harmonized, stable, and inclusive financial sector across Somalia. In this regard, 
support will be provided to State Bank of Puntland to improve its institutional efficiency and capacity, as well 
as support financial inclusion efforts toward enhancing economic empowerment for people of Puntland and, 
thus, contributing to its and Somalia’s economic development. 
(ii) 
Select financial sector and institutional reforms (US$6 million) 
• 
A PBC-linked approach will also be used to incentivize selected financial sector and institutional reforms. Going 
beyond input-based investments and toward outcomes, the PBCs will be critical in accelerating these reforms, 
including: (A) strengthening Somalia’s macroprudential framework; (B) improving financial sector data 
collection, analysis, and transparency; (C) expanding oversight over the financial system; (D) establishing
=== PAGE 25 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 11  
 
effective regulations and institutional practices for consolidated supervision of banks and non-bank financial 
institutions; and (E) incentivizing the development, approval, launch, and utilization of a Credit Information 
System (CIS). 
Table 2. CBS PBCs 
PBC 
Completion Verification/Evidence 
Amount (US$, 
million) 
PBC 1: Macroprudential 
framework strengthened 
Macroprudential framework to monitor, assess, and mitigate systemic risks approved 
by the CBS board and implementation plan operationalized 
0.75 
PBC 2: Financial sector 
data collection, analysis 
and transparency 
improved 
(a) Consolidated Financial Soundness Indicator (FSI) data is published on the CBS 
website, with an expanded International Monetary Fund (IMF) FSI data coverage 
(including all licensed banks), and (b) consolidated FSI data is published on the CBS 
website, with expanded IMF FSI data coverage (including all licensed banks and other 
licensed financial institutions). 
1.00 
PBC 3: Expanded 
oversight of financial 
system 
(a) Regulation issued by CBS on Safeguarding of Mobile Money Funds, (b) regulation 
issued by CBS relating to Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs), (c) at least 
5 MFIs and 1 SACCO licensed by CBS, and (d) regular offsite supervision for all licensed 
MFIs and SACCOs conducted and onsite examinations completed for at least 2 MFIs 
and 1 SACCO. 
1.25 
PBC 4: Consolidated 
supervision of banks and 
non-bank financial 
institutions 
(a) Regulation to undertake consolidated supervision and financial reporting of 
financial groups is issued by the CBS, (b) CBS has completed consolidated supervision 
of at least 1 financial group (comprising 1 of the 4 largest banks in terms of total assets 
at the end of previous calendar year), and (c) CBS has completed consolidated 
supervision of at least 2 additional financial groups (comprising at least 1 additional 
bank from the 4 largest banks in terms of total assets at the end of previous calendar 
year). 
2.00 
PBC 5: Improved access 
to financial services 
through better risk 
assessment of borrowers 
(a) CIS framework developed and approved by the CBS Board, (b) CIS launched with at 
least 4 banks connected and contributing to data collection, and (c) CIS being used by 
at least 4 banks contributing and accessing credit information consistently over 3 
months. 
1.00 
Note: Details on PBCs and the Verification Protocol are provided in annex 1 on the Results Framework. The first table (A1) in annex 2 
contains a summary of the CBS program (including eligible expenditures for PBCs). 
(iii) Enhancement of financial infrastructure (US$5 million) 
• 
Building on the support under SCALED-UP and in line with the NPS Law (expected in 2025), this subcomponent 
will continue to enhance the safety, security, soundness, and resilience of the payment system and strengthen 
related oversight. Specifically, payment cost efficiency will be improved while increasing speed and 
maintaining security by supporting CBS to fully operationalize the Somalia Payment Switch, including the 
Somalia Instant Payment System (SIPS) that will enable banks to connect their automated teller machines and 
point-of-sale terminals to a single national network, making card payments interoperable and enabling the 
implementation of the international bank account number and quick response code initiatives. The support 
will also include enhancements to the oversight of the financial market infrastructure and related capacity; 
strengthen and streamline the governance and operational framework for NPS to ensure efficiency and 
interoperability; and support policies, practices, and procedures to promote resilient payment and settlement 
systems and services. 
(b) FRC (US$3 million). The project will continue to support the implementation of the NRA action plan (including any 
updates to the NRA itself) as well as provide support for the implementation of the amended AML/CFT Law. Support 
is also envisaged for the preparation and eventual implementation of National Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment
=== PAGE 26 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 12  
 
Action Plan, AML/CFT awareness strategy, and go-AML (Anti-Money Laundering System) customization, as well as 
upgrades/enhancements to disaster recovery and secondary data systems. The project will also support FRC in 
preparing for the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force mutual evaluation and related technical 
reviews and follow-up actions. Support is also envisaged for enhancing FRC operational and oversight capacities 
including through upgrading related ICT systems and expanding outreach to FMS. 
(c) 
BoS (US$3.5 million). The project will support the BoS in its efforts to enhance financial services and strengthen the 
financial sector in Somaliland to be able to contribute to the broader economic development goals for the region. It 
will support its efforts to improve financial inclusion and access to finance for MSMEs through the implementation 
of the Somaliland Financial Inclusion Strategy 2025–2029 with focus on increasing access to formal financial services, 
developing new products aligned with emerging market needs, and empowering individuals and entrepreneurs 
through enhanced financial literacy and consumer protection. The project will also support the modernization and 
strengthening of BoS capacity to guide and oversee financial sector development and financial institutions operating 
in Somaliland, including through enhancements to the BoS financial infrastructure that would, among other things, 
strengthen data exchange and cooperation with the initiatives led by the CBS, strengthen broader financial market 
infrastructure, and improve integrated monitoring of the financial system. The project’s funds will also cover all BoS 
support associated with project implementation costs. 
Component 3: Enhancing access to finance and resilience for MSMEs (US$25.5 million equivalent IDA) 
27. 
Access to finance is a major constraint for Somali businesses, which SCALED-UP and development partners, such 
as the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), are attempting to address through Gargaara for productive and priority 
sectors such as renewable energy, health, and education. However, due to the perceived and actual risks associated with 
the firms in productive and climate-critical and vulnerable sectors, MSMEs within these sectors are receiving a minimal 
proportion of credits through the formal financial sector, despite improvements made through Gargaara’s wholesale 
lending program. This component consists of mutually reinforcing interventions to improve the resilience of MSMEs in 
those key priority sectors, through credit enhancements and capacity strengthening of MSMEs to improve their efficiency 
and competitiveness. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Derisking access to finance for MSMEs (US$14.5 million equivalent IDA) 
28. 
Learning from the pilot RSM being launched with Gargaara under SCALED-UP, the project will enhance the design 
and scale up the RSM support by US$12.5 million to improve access to finance for MSMEs in high-priority underserved 
productive sectors (for example, agriculture, livestock, and fisheries) as well as climate-critical and/or vulnerable sectors. 
Often, these segments face challenges of collateral and/or finding a guarantor (for example, due to limited appetite to 
support sectors directly vulnerable to climate shocks and due to lack of understanding of climate-adaptive products and 
technologies). The RSM would help derisk shortfall in collateral and guarantor requirements and mobilize US$29 million 
in commercial financing to key value chain MSMEs by PFIs. Key elements of the RSM include the following: 
• 
Operational model. Given the nascent stage of development of the Somali finance sector, the RSM is unlikely to 
reach independent sustainability in the short term (given limited fee income and no investment earning options 
even if capital was deployed) and could thus be operated by Gargaara for a fixed period with a clearly articulated 
exit plan for winding down the RSM. A clearly defined credit enhancement and derisking purpose will also be 
detailed for the targeted MSME segments. In designing this approach, building on lessons from the SCALED-UP 
RSM pilot, efforts will be made to ensure a reasonable operational period for the program, along with a clear exit 
plan to avoid market disruption. Firms in productive and climate-critical and vulnerable sectors account for the 
largest share of employment in Somalia. Under SCALED-UP RSM pilot, financing did not reach them in levels 
reflecting their share of the overall economy, due to a high-risk perception associated with them. The financing 
gap prevalent in Somalia thus affects them more significantly than other firms. The focus on vulnerable firms and
=== PAGE 27 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 13  
 
women-owned enterprises that face similar challenges complements SCALED-UP RSM pilot and would attempt to 
lessen these financing gaps.  
• 
Eligibility. The RSM will cover a portion of losses for eligible MSME loans originated by PFIs assessed under clear 
eligibility criteria to participate in the RSM similar to those already in place under the Gargaara program. 
• 
Sector focus. The RSM will target MSMEs that operate or are linked to productive and climate-critical and 
vulnerable sectors, especially those in agriculture, livestock, and fisheries. Women-owned enterprises, which are 
generally more vulnerable, will also be priority targets. To this end, the RSM will offer greater coverage to women-
owned/managed businesses to incentivize lending to them. Similar consideration may also be given to other 
higher-priority segments when finalizing the details of the program in consultation with the key stakeholders. 
• 
Fees. The RSM will charge a notional service fee aligned with Somalia’s Islamic banking practices. 
29. 
The RSM fund will be complemented with funding (US$2 million) for enhancement and confirmation of RSM 
model/design, related operations support, and market research. It will also support financial institutions and related 
stakeholders in strengthening related capabilities, including new products and services development and related 
awareness raising and outreach and capacity building for key participating institutions and stakeholders. This support is 
anticipated to be delivered in coordination with the CBS and financial institutions (both public and private and the relevant 
industry associations). This will re-enforce prior capacity building undertaken related to product development, risk 
assessment, and portfolio management capabilities. 
Subcomponent 3.2: Enhancing MSMEs’ resilience (US$11 million equivalent IDA) 
30. 
The subcomponent will aim to bolster firms’ resilience by providing BDS and targeted adaptation interventions to 
two types of stakeholders: (a) MSMEs from the roster of firms that have already completed the standardized training and 
advisory services provided under SCALED-UP or other relevant programs; and (b) productive and climate-critical and 
vulnerable MSMEs as well as related cooperatives or associations that receive sector-specific technical assistance (TA) 
through other ongoing World Bank-financed or development partner projects. By enhancing firms’ capacity to adapt to 
market-perceived and actual risks, these interventions will help safeguard business continuity and productivity, thereby 
protecting existing jobs and enabling the creation of new, more sustainable employment opportunities. BDS will be 
tailored to small sub-cohorts of both types of stakeholders. The mode(s) of delivery of BDS will be confirmed during 
implementation based on experience and lessons from the SCALED-UP supported BDS pilot to be launched in the second 
quarter of 2025. A voucher-based model may be considered to provide relevant training to interested and eligible MSMEs, 
and awareness-raising activities will be conducted to support the participation of women-owned businesses in the BDS 
program. 
Component 4: Project Management (US$6 million equivalent IDA) 
31. 
This component will support project implementation, which will be executed by the FGS using a single Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) anchored in the MoF in Mogadishu, leveraging the existing SCALED-UP PIU. The PIU will be 
responsible for day-to-day project management (including fiduciary procedures, M&E, and the implementation of 
Environmental and Social Framework [ESF] requirements) and will coordinate closely with the relevant entities supported 
under the project. The PIU will also coordinate activities across the FGS, including FMS. The project will set up a single 
Project Steering Committee (PSC) not later than 30 days after grant effectiveness. In addition, funding will be allocated to 
establish a project-level GRM, and resources will be dedicated to ensuring a gender-sensitive project implementation. 
Implementation arrangements for Somaliland are discussed in the project implementation section below.
=== PAGE 28 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 14  
 
E. Role of Partners 
 
32. 
Project implementation will be closely coordinated with development partners active in the private sector and 
financial sector development space to ensure financing, capacity building, and policy alignment. SPRING Project 
interventions will be closely coordinated and aligned with the International Finance Cooperation (IFC) and Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency activities aimed at improving the business environment and deepening financial sector 
reforms in Somalia. The financial sector support under Component 2 will focus on areas not covered by the recently 
launched African Development Bank-financed Somalia Financial Sector Development Project (P-SO-HZ0-001), which 
provides capacity building to key institutions including CBS and FRC, and the extensive IMF program in Somalia. Other 
activities, including the BDS, RSM, access to finance, and digital ID activities, will be coordinated with ongoing and planned 
support by the United Nations entities (including the United Nations Development Programme [UNDP] and United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization), national development agencies (for example, UK, USA, Sweden, and Germany), as 
well as a wider range of SMPF partners. 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
33. 
SPRING Project will draw extensively from key lessons learned in previous World Bank engagements in Somalia 
and other fragile contexts. 
34. 
One of the central lessons that will be considered is the importance of long-term state-building and institutional 
capacity development, while balancing it with immediate crisis response. In fragile states such as Somalia, where low 
institutional capacity poses significant challenges, progress is often nonlinear, particularly in establishing new public 
institutions. Developing functional capabilities and ensuring adequate corporate governance for these institutions is 
especially complex, as seen during the implementation of SCALED-UP, which required extensive TA and enhanced 
supervision, including third-party monitoring, for entities such as Gargaara, National Communication Authority, DPA, and 
NIRA. To address these challenges, the project will prioritize strengthening critical institutions such as the MoF and the 
CBS to ensure fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic stability and continue capacity-building activities at other core 
entities for private sector development in Somalia, including Gargaara and PFIs, while also focusing on targeted TA for 
effective establishment of new institutions. Given Somalia’s limited fiscal capacity, it will be essential to carefully manage 
new budgetary commitments as institutional sustainability has proved to be a challenge for other new institutions 
supported by the World Bank-financed projects. 
35. 
A phased and iterative implementation approach will be applied to the project implementation. Comprehensive 
reforms are difficult to achieve all at once in fragile environments, so the project will adopt a step-by-step approach. This 
method ensures the flexibility needed to adapt to Somalia’s changing security and economic conditions, while enabling 
the project to adjust based on real-time assessments. This approach mirrors the phased implementation strategies seen 
in successful projects such as the SCRP and Somalia - Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
Project. At the same time, fragile contexts require balancing immediate crisis response with long-term institution building. 
Flexibility is critical, as Somalia faces regular crises such as droughts, floods, and security disruptions. The project will 
leverage existing delivery mechanisms to respond to crises without sacrificing the long-term goal of strengthening 
institutional capacity. 
36. 
Substantial coordination and outreach efforts are required to ensure national projects such as SPRING Project 
to reach beneficiaries across Somalia, including underserved segments of the population. One of the primary lessons 
learned from SCALED-UP is that substantial coordination and outreach are critical to ensure national projects effectively 
reach beneficiaries across Somalia. Successful implementation, such as extending the SBRS and CBS operations to FMS 
and rolling out the digital ID system, require strengthened collaboration between the FGS and FMS. The SPRING Project 
will finance enhanced coordination and outreach efforts, including targeted support for financial sector development in
=== PAGE 29 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 15  
 
Somaliland. SCALED-UP and other World Bank-financed projects in Somalia have also shown that enhanced and tailored 
efforts are needed to reach women beneficiaries in the areas of access to finance, business registration, and ID registration 
activities. 
37. 
The inclusion of BDS alongside financial support draws on lessons learned from projects such as SCALED-UP, 
Zambia Agribusiness and Trade Project (P156492), and the Afghanistan Resilience Trust Fund (ARTF) - Microfinance 
(P091264) Project. In fragile states, MSMEs often struggle with multiple constraints—limited access to finance, weak 
market links, and operational inefficiencies. By integrating tailored BDS with financial support, the project will help MSMEs 
overcome these barriers, particularly in high-potential sectors such as energy, agriculture, and livestock. Furthermore, the 
project incorporates climate-smart practices, leveraging lessons from the Yemen Emergency Electricity Access Project 
(P163777) and Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund Project (P118916) to improve MSMEs’ resilience to climate-
related shocks, a key issue in Somalia. 
38. 
The design of the project’s digital ID component draws extensively from the World Bank’s Identification for 
Development program and global best practices. There is strong commitment from NIRA and the FGS to align the ID 
system with the 10 Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development, ensuring that it is inclusive, secure, and 
responsive to user needs. The ID legislation and ID implementation strategy, developed in consultation with the FMS and 
other stakeholders, provide for an inclusive registration approach, including witness-based identity verification for those 
without any prior official documents and free-of-charge registration for those without the ability to pay. Special 
registration policies and measures are being developed to facilitate registration for women and people with disabilities. 
NIRA is implementing a customer feedback mechanism and additional system updates to streamline the registration 
process. 
39. 
PBCs can be an effective tool incentivizing financial sector reforms, but pragmatic and context-adjusted 
prioritization of PBCs is crucial. PBCs played an important role in incentivizing financial sector reforms under SCALED-UP. 
However, PBCs still remain a relatively new instrument for the Somali counterparts, and the PBC design complexity under 
SCALED-UP has resulted in some implementation delays. It has also become evident that aligning PBCs with activities 
directly under the control of the implementing entities responsible for their fulfillment is essential. Furthermore, hiring of 
an independent verification agent (IVA) to verify the completion of PBCs has experienced delays in developing the terms 
of reference, issues in coordinating verifications with the client, and difficulties in renewing/extending contracts. 
Leveraging these lessons learned from SCALED-UP, extensive consultations were conducted with the CBS to adjust the 
scope of the PBCs and agree on timelines. The client now has experience managing the IVA contract and coordinating 
verification visits when appropriate, which is expected to smoothen the implementation of PBCs. 
40. 
Risk mitigation is a central theme throughout the project design. Fragile environments such as Somalia’s require 
a cautious, phased approach to project implementation. Ensuring transparency and accountability is also crucial. The 
project will implement strict procurement and financial governance protocols, alongside independent audits and third-
party verification mechanisms, ensuring that funds are managed responsibly, as was emphasized in SCALED-UP. 
Leveraging World Bank Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support, bundling procurements, and building PIU’s 
procurement capacity have also been proven to be effective in managing procurement-related risks, as evidenced through 
SCALED-UP and other World Bank-financed projects in Somalia. 
III. 
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
41. 
The project will establish a layered and inclusive oversight structure to ensure effective coordination among 
key government stakeholders. The MoF will serve as the implementing agency coordinating with other government
=== PAGE 30 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 16  
 
entities relevant for project implementation. A single PSC, chaired by the MoF and including representatives from MoCI, 
CBS, FRC, NIRA, and other stakeholders, will be formed to provide policy guidance and monitor progress. The PSC will be 
supported by a Secretariat led by the Director General of the MoF, ensuring smooth project oversight. 
Figure 2. SPRING Project Implementation Arrangements 
 
42. 
Day-to-day implementation will be managed by a PIU housed within the MoF. The SCALED-UP PIU, established 
under the MoF, has demonstrated satisfactory performance and possesses substantial experience with World Bank-
financed projects. This PIU will take on the additional responsibility of managing SPRING Project and work closely with 
focal points in key ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) to ensure that project activities are implemented 
effectively, with attention to sequencing, stakeholder consultations, and engagement processes. The existing PIU’s 
familiarity with World Bank fiduciary and ESF guidelines, along with its robust management information systems (MIS) 
and M&E systems, will contribute to efficient execution of project activities. By leveraging these systems, the PIU will 
ensure smooth coordination across the FGS and FMS. To facilitate readiness for implementation, the PIU will assist MDAs 
and other institutions in setting up the required structures. The PIU’s responsibilities include providing TA to MDAs in 
preparing priority investment programs, hiring consultants for specialized tasks, and ensuring that services delivered are 
both high quality and cost efficient. The PIU will also validate project results through stakeholder consultations and, where 
necessary, third-party verification. As a condition of grant effectiveness, a Project Operations Manual (POM), satisfactory 
to IDA, will be prepared and adopted. This POM will outline managerial, financial, administrative, procurement, 
environmental and social policies and procedures, providing a comprehensive guide for all project-related activities and 
ensuring that the project operates according to the required standards and guidelines.  
43. 
This integrated approach will enable consistent support across FMS, tailored to its readiness and institutional 
capacities. In addition to ensuring alignment among the various MDAs involved in the project, the PIU will proactively 
manage communication with FMS stakeholders. This coordination will help ensure that all components of the project are 
implemented in a synchronized and efficient manner across all FMS. 
44. 
The PIU team includes a project coordinator, a procurement specialist, and other key staff whose performance 
has been satisfactory. The capacity of the existing staff will be continually strengthened. Additionally, the PIU will recruit 
new staff members to address any emerging requirements and ensure the project’s smooth progress. 
45. 
Implementation in Somaliland will be coordinated through a separate PIU. This PIU is expected to be housed 
within the MoF of Somaliland and will be in charge of enabling the implementation of the activities supported by this 
project for the BoS. The External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) Unit, in consultation with the Office of Accountant
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 17  
 
General and Director General of the MoF, will institute adequate controls in the management of funds allocated to 
Somaliland. A related subsidiary agreement will be prepared accordingly following project approval. 
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements 
46. 
M&E will play a central role in the project’s implementation. The PIU will prepare and submit Quarterly Progress 
Reports (QPRs) to the PSC and the World Bank, detailing project activities, financial disbursements, and compliance with 
environmental and social (E&S) standards. These QPRs will form the basis for biannual project reviews to ensure progress 
is on track and allow for timely adjustments if necessary. Independent third-party monitoring may also be leveraged to 
further strengthen oversight, identify governance issues, and recommend corrective actions as needed. To verify the 
completion of PBCs, a verification agency will be hired not later than nine months after grant effectiveness, under terms 
of reference satisfactory to IDA. 
47. 
The PIU’s M&E team will manage the ongoing tracking and reporting of project results, systematically collecting 
data and updating them in a centralized MIS to provide real-time access to critical project information. An M&E plan, 
developed by the PIU, will outline the Theory of Change, data collection methodologies, and a timeline for tracking 
outcomes, ensuring standardized indicators and data consistency across project components. For specific monitoring 
activities, such as those related to digital ID services, the FGS will assign oversight responsibilities to relevant autonomous 
entities. These entities will use tools (for example, satisfaction surveys and spot checks) to monitor service delivery and 
gather feedback. Surveys and progress assessments may also be conducted to track project activities, such as digital ID 
enrollment, job creation, and others. 
C. Disbursement Arrangements 
48. 
The project will follow the transaction-based method of disbursement, which will include advances, 
reimbursements, direct payments, and special commitments. An initial advance will be disbursed to the Designated 
Account (DA) following the submission of a withdrawal application to the World Bank accompanied by a six-month cash 
forecast. Subsequently, the project will draw down the proceeds of the grant following submission of an application for 
withdrawal accompanied by statement of expenditures incurred. The respective MoF and other implementing agencies 
will manage these processes in accordance with the World Bank’s procedures. Withdrawal applications will be submitted 
via Client Connection, and disbursements will be made based on verified eligible expenditures. For PBCs, funds will be 
released only after the achievement of specified outcomes and verification. 
49. 
The project proceeds from the IDA and SMPF will be channeled through three DAs, separately managed by the 
FGS and Somaliland. Under the FGS, the DA-A will be used to manage the funds for all project components. Under 
Somaliland authorities, the DA-B will be used to manage the funds earmarked for Somaliland activities. All deposits and 
payments from these accounts will adhere to the provisions outlined in the Financing Agreement and Disbursement and 
Financial Information Letters (DFILs). Authorized signatories will be designated to ensure compliance with the World Bank 
disbursement procedures, and a GRM will be established to support transparent fund flows. Detailed disbursement 
arrangements will be documented in the DFIL. Typical funds flow arrangements are highlighted in Figure 3.
=== PAGE 32 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 18  
 
Figure 3. Flow of Funds 
 
IV. 
PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
50. 
A cost-benefit analysis has been conducted—and will continue to be refined—for activities with clearly 
attributable and quantifiable benefits at the individual beneficiary level (Component 3). Under base case assumptions, 
the combined economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for these activities is 15.4 percent, and their net present value is 
US$1.2 million, with a discount rate of 14 percent.22 Costs and benefits for Subcomponents 3.1 and 3.2 were estimated 
separately.  
• 
Subcomponent 3.1 analysis. The primary benefit of the RSM is the accessibility of capital to firms that were 
previously un-bankable, facilitated by improved access to credit enabled by the derisking through the RSM. Average 
interest rates and potential default rates are extrapolated from CBS data, and MSME yearly return over capital is 
determined based on academic research on the topic. Risk mitigation benefits are not included in this analysis, as 
they are assumed to be offset by potential costs associated with the default of loans covered under the RSM. 
Operational costs are estimated using historical data from similar RSM approaches implemented in Somalia.23 
Additional assumptions include a risk cover of 63 percent, leveraging at one time,24 and a gradual increase in 
exposure. The expected turnover is 1.5 times over the five years in which the project will be under implementation. 
An average size of loans guaranteed of US$25,000 is assumed based on lessons learned with Gargaara during the 
implementation of SCALED-UP. The capital will be returned after that period given the difficulties of creating a 
sustainable RSM in Somalia. Additionally, the analysis considers benefits from wages (less opportunity costs) of 
 
22 The EIRR is calculated over a 20-year period, in line with standard practice. However, for Subcomponent 3.1 cash flows, the timeline is limited to the project duration 
due to uncertainty regarding the RSM facility’s sustainability beyond project completion. 
23 RSM operational costs assumed are US$250,000 per year. An expenditure of US$600,000 per year for TA support to help financial institutions develop related 
capacities is also considered. 
24 Risk cover assumption strikes a balance between encouraging financial institutions to lend and mitigating moral hazard. While leverage assumptions are optimistic in 
an FCV country such as Somalia, it is supported by the substantial TA and capacity building which financial institutions are receiving from World Bank engagements in 
Somalia.
=== PAGE 33 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 19  
 
new incremental workers25 directly employed by MSMEs due to the access to finance enabled by the RSM. Given 
the scarcity of economic data in Somalia, these benefits are calculated using MSME and cluster information from 
neighboring countries, which is then discounted to account for the FCV situation in Somalia.26 
• 
Subcomponent 3.2 analysis. Benefits are measured by evaluating the impact of enhancing the resilience of firms 
due to the BDS provided.27 Specifically, the analysis considers the differential in profitability attributable to 
reductions of revenue caused by climate disasters that are mitigated due to improved capacity from BDS28 and 
wages (less opportunity costs) of new incremental workers directly employed by MSMEs due to their increased 
capacity to be resilient.29 Job generation assumptions are the same as those used for Subcomponent 3.1, and 
average salaries net of opportunity costs were extrapolated from consultations and relevant research papers. This 
approach ensures that economic gains directly linked to improved climate resilience are considered, highlighting 
both the stabilization of profits and the sustained ability to create and maintain jobs in the face of climate-related 
challenges. 
51. 
The project is expected to produce benefits beyond the above analysis by improving the enabling environment 
for private sector growth (Component 1). Interventions that streamline registration procedures for MSMEs can 
significantly affect firm performance, and trade facilitation measures can have a substantial impact on export promotion. 
Aligning domestic standards with international regulations is also critical to avoiding diseconomies of scale and the ability 
to be competitive in local and global markets. Moreover, scaling up efforts to develop Somalia’s foundational digital ID 
system is anticipated to create economic value by enabling more efficient service delivery for government agencies and 
businesses and accelerating financial inclusion. In effect, unique identifiers can facilitate the participation of vulnerable 
segments in the economy and support private sector growth by simplifying onboarding processes and reducing risks, 
ultimately fostering broader economic and social inclusion. 
52. 
The deepening of financial sector reforms and the enhancement of institutional capacity will also bring 
substantial benefits. Strengthening the resilience of financial institutions will reduce the likelihood of macro-fiscal 
challenges being exacerbated by financial system stress. A well-functioning financial sector drives real economic activity 
and accelerates economic growth by facilitating the flow of capital to individuals and entrepreneurs through reliable 
financing channels, which has positive distributional effects. Preserving financial sector stability protects depositors’ 
savings and ensures essential financial services for millions of low-income households, supporting broader economic 
stability and growth. Additionally, AML/CFT activities will prevent integrity failures from undermining financial institutions’ 
stability and increase financial flows toward Somalia.30 Strengthening foundational public financial institutions and 
financial infrastructure will also generate significant long-term economic benefits and savings for the FGS and the private 
sector—with payments infrastructure enhancements promoting financial inclusion, lowering transaction costs in informal 
markets, and reducing risks associated with cash-based transactions. 
 
25 This is considered in both the benefits and costs dimensions. Incremental profit after tax for firms is calculated based on the assumption of differential growth while 
maintaining the same earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) structure. Additional salary costs are therefore included in this calculation. The additional benefit from 
incremental wages (less opportunity costs) does not represent an increase in salaries for existing workers but rather the difference between the wages that additional 
workers earn at these firms and what they would earn as informal workers. 
26 It is assumed that an additional unskilled job and an additional skilled job is generated for each US$5,700 and US$22,800, respectively, of revenue increase in the 
firms financed by the RSM. 
27 Average BDS cost of US$4,750 assumed based on lessons learned from similar programs by development partners and in SCALED-UP. 
28 Given lessons learned from similar programs by development partners and in SCALED-UP, it was assumed that target MSMEs have an annual revenue of US$4,000 
with an EBIT margin of 30 percent and annual sales growth (without the project) of 5 percent. Income tax rate assumptions are in line with the Somalia tax rate for the 
tax bracket of the average MSME profile described. 
29 While the economic and financial analysis focuses only on the creation of direct jobs through activities under Subcomponent 3.2, each component could generate a 
wide range of indirect jobs. Given the scarcity of economic data in Somalia—including that of sectoral GDP and employment multipliers—a robust analysis in this front 
was not possible. 
30 IMF. 2023. “Background Paper II: AML/CFT Risk-Based Supervision of Banks.”
=== PAGE 34 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 20  
 
Summary of the FIF Assessment 
53. 
The FIF Assessment shows that the project is in line with the World Bank Guidance for FIF. The financial sector 
has matured over the past years, and demand remains strong for a range of Sharia-compliant financial services. However, 
there are significant challenges to expanding outreach and new products introduction. Macroeconomic stability is 
vulnerable to external shocks, which put a strain on the capacity of key financial institutions. Formal bank penetration 
remains low, with lending focused on nonproductive sectors. SCALED-UP has built a network of sound financial institutions 
to provide credit, and the SPRING Project will use this to promote a risk-sharing facility to expand outreach. The World 
Bank Sixteen Principles have been used to guide the development of the new facility, although time will be required to 
fully develop internal controls, risk management, and claim management. Additional discussions beyond this project will 
be needed to address challenges regarding the roles of the revived Somali Development and Reconstruction Bank and 
Gargaara. 
Alignment with Corporate Commitments 
54. 
Integrating climate and development is a pillar of the WBG’s Climate Change Action Plan. In this respect, the 
project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement (PA) on both mitigation and adaptation, contributing to Somalia’s 
commitment to a low-emission, climate-resilient development pathway. By ratifying the Paris Climate Agreement, United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and Kyoto Protocol, Somalia has shown dedication and obligation to 
the implementation of strategies to mitigate the effects of climate change and adopt a climate-resilient, sustainable 
development pathway. Project interventions fall under universally recognized activities consistent with the Paris 
Agreement’s adaptation and mitigation objectives and Somalia’s Nationally Determined Contribution 2021–2030, which 
includes an ambitious target to reduce emissions by 30 percent by 2030, conditional on international support.31 PA will be 
ensured through transaction-based assessments, with all activities—not just climate-related ones—meeting PA standards. 
55. 
The mitigation risks are reduced to a low level. Somalia’s CO2 emissions are, with 0.05 tons per capita, the third 
lowest in the world, and its potential to meaningfully contribute to mitigate climate change is thus very low. Despite this, 
increasing access to finance is unlikely to increase CO2 emissions significantly. The modalities of the project’s 
implementation are expected to increase the climate change mitigation capacity of Somalia. Implementing agencies, 
including Gargaara, will receive training to ensure the expertise required for PA. The project’s dedicated PIU will include 
focal points for E&S aspects as well as climate change, and a member of the PSC will oversee compliance with PA standards. 
With these measures, the project is aligned with the Common Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking, 
specifically through building capacity in the M&E mechanisms to track, evaluate, and report on the management of 
climate-related risks. This ensures that the project remains aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement and the Common 
Principles for Climate Mitigation Finance Tracking throughout its implementation and that it reduces mitigation risks to a 
low level. 
56. 
The adaptation risks are reduced to an acceptable level. Overall, the main adaptation risks for Somalia stem from 
droughts, floods, and extreme weather events. With a non-infrastructure-based approach, the project minimizes 
geophysical risks while maximizing systemic resilience-building, reducing the adaptation risk. By leveraging a foundational 
ID system, the project enables targeted social protection measures to cushion climate-related shocks, expand access to 
financial services, and foster resilience to climate impacts and contribute to climate co-benefits. These efforts are 
particularly crucial in a country facing recurrent droughts and floods that drive internal displacement and threaten 
economic stability, which may be exacerbated by climate change.32 Since 2020, Somalia has experienced five consecutive 
failed rainy seasons, adversely affecting 46 percent of the population, displacing over a million people, and causing an 
estimated 46,000 deaths in 2022 alone. Major floods and droughts are extremely frequent and are the largest cause of 
 
31 Federal Government of Somalia, “Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)”, July 2021. 
32 Somalia Climate Risk Review, World Bank Group, 2023.
=== PAGE 35 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 21  
 
Somalia’s ever-increasing internal displacement crisis.33 Further, the project is screened for climate and disaster risk. 
Screening for climate and disaster risks ensures alignment with Somalia’s broader climate and development priorities. By 
enabling inclusive growth, lowering transaction costs, and facilitating efficient resource allocation, the project strengthens 
Somalia’s institutional capacity to navigate climate-related risks and adapt to them. These efforts complement the 
country’s economic and technical frameworks, fostering sustainable and climate-resilient development. To ensure 
effective implementation and reduction of adaptation risks, robust checks and balances are integrated into the project’s 
implementation arrangements. 
57. 
Gender. Gender inequality remains an entrenched issue in Somalia. The country has high levels of inequality, 
ranking 164/166 on the UNDP Gender Inequality Index, and scores low on UNDP’s Gender Development Index 
(0.769/1.100).34 In addition, in 2024, Somalia scored 32.5/100 on the legal component of the World Bank’s Women, 
Business, and the Law Index, highlighting the significant gaps in the legal/regulatory frameworks to support women. 
Women also continue to be excluded from economic activities. As of 2023, women’s labor force participation stood at 
21.2 percent, compared to 47.3 percent for men, well below regional, income group, and global benchmarks. The SPRING 
Project will address gender gaps by supporting women’s economic empowerment through several themes, such as: (a) 
access to formal registration of businesses, (b) access to identification, (c) access to finance, and (d) vulnerability to shocks. 
58. 
Women and women-owned/managed businesses face a wide range of challenges that hamper their economic 
empowerment. For instance, most women-owned businesses are informal, which restricts their ability to access services 
to support their growth, such as formal finance. Several factors can explain this situation, including the fact that the 
framework for business registration does not adequately cover them due to their small size. Access to identification for 
women is also an issue, with only 27 percent of women registered in the recently launched digital ID system. The gap in 
access to identification can be explained by structural barriers, traditional gender roles, and clan-based customs.35 In 
addition, access to finance is also a roadblock as recent studies found that 87 percent of majority female-owned firms 
faced credit constraints. Several demand- and supply-side constraints contribute to this issue, including limited access to 
collateral, business formal documents, and guarantors, among others. Lastly, women-owned businesses are predominant 
in the agriculture and livestock sectors, rendering them particularly vulnerable to shocks, specifically climate-related ones. 
59. 
The SPRING Project will include several activities to address those gender gaps. Specifically, the project will 
improve business registration processes by simplifying requirements, broadening registration categories, and undertaking 
related policy and administrative reforms to include micro-enterprises. The SPRING Project will also expand the footprint 
for the digital ID registration and may consider other approaches, such as all-female registration units. In addition, the 
project will facilitate access to finance by providing higher coverage to women-owned/managed businesses through the 
RSM. It will also use various strategies to enable the uptake of BDS by women-owned/managed businesses to improve 
their ability to access finance and/or enhance their resilience. Additional cross-themes efforts will be organized, such as 
tailored information campaigns, workshops, and establishing partnerships with local civil society organizations. The results 
framework includes indicators to monitor progress, such as the number of women with digitally verifiable identification 
(target: 2,500,000). The gender analysis results chain is available in the second table (A2) in annex 2. 
60. 
Citizen engagement (CE) and social accountability will be promoted throughout the project cycle. In accordance 
with the World Bank’s ESF, an Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS), an Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan (ESCP), and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) have been prepared and disclosed. They identify 
project stakeholders, means to ensure effective project communication, consultations with each stakeholder group, and 
indicators to monitor its implementation. CE will be measured by assessing the ability of select institutions to address 
 
33 Somalia Climate Risk Review, World Bank Group, 2023. 
34 United Nations Development Programme, “Somalia: Gender Inequality Index.” (accessed February 2025); United Nations Development Programme, “Somali: 
Gender Development Index” (accessed February 2025). 
35 Syn, Juliette, and Laura Cunial. 2022. “Who Are You? Understanding the Linkages between Legal Identity and Housing, Land and Property Rights in Somalia.” 
Norwegian Refugee Council.
=== PAGE 36 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 22  
 
beneficiaries’ requests for support and/or concerns. After a customer support request and/or grievance is resolved, the 
feedback will be analyzed to identify areas for improvement, and efforts will be undertaken to conduct related upgrades 
to systems and processes, thus enhancing project implementation. Those efforts will also include communicating 
upgrades made to systems and processes to stakeholders based on internal reviews or their feedback. 
61. 
Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD)/Private Capital Enabling (PCE). The project is also aligned with the 
WBG’s corporate objectives for MFD and has been tagged as PCE/MFD-enabling. In particular, Subcomponent 3.1 is 
expected to enable US$29 million in commercial financing to underserved MSMEs in key value chains, through the 
establishment of an RSM with a coverage of 60 percent and a turnover of 150 percent. Progress for this activity is captured 
under Intermediate Results Indicator 17, which measures the amount of private capital enabled through the RSM. Most 
activities in the project are also verified as MFD-enabling. More specifically, (a) Subcomponent 1.1 supports upstream 
policy reforms to unlock private sector solutions through the removal of market distortions, (b) Subcomponent 1.2 will 
enable additional access to finance through the continued development of digital identity verification services (for 
example, e-KYC), and (c) Subcomponents 2.2 and 3.2 will address binding constraints for sustainable private sector 
development through their interventions to strengthen financial sector stability/integrity and infrastructure and to 
improve firm resilience. 
B. Fiduciary 
62. 
Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for 
IPF Borrowers, dated September 2023 (Procurement Regulations); the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loans and IDA Credits 
and Grants, dated October 15, 2006 and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016; and the provisions stipulated in 
the Financing Agreement. The PIU will ensure smooth procurement coordination across Somalia. The MoF prepared the 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) along with the Procurement Plan (PP) for the first 18 months of 
the project, with a focus on key procurement activities to select the optimum fit-for-purpose method and market 
approach. The PPSD includes a summary on procurement risk, mitigation measures, an action plan, and procurement 
implementation support and supervision plan (Contract Management Plan). The World Bank Systematic Tracking of 
Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool will be used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement 
transactions for the implementing agency of the project. Staff of the SCALED-UP PIU, who will take on the additional 
responsibility for SPRING Project, are already trained in using the STEP tool. 
63. 
Financial management (FM). The country’s Public Financial Management (PFM) legal framework is weak and 
fragmented. The PFM accountability systems, supporting processes, and intergovernmental fiscal relations and 
mechanisms between the FGS and FMS in the country are evolving and currently being supported through other World 
Bank-funded operations. The project will retain a qualified FM specialist at the PIU supported by the team from the EAFS 
in the Office of the Accountant General. Payment processing will be made through the Somali Financial Management 
Information System, and periodic financial reports will be generated. The project will submit quarterly unaudited interim 
financial reports (IFRs) to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of the quarter in line with the Financing Agreement. 
The main fiduciary risks that are likely to affect the project include challenges of inadequate capacity, risk of delayed and 
inaccurate financial and audit reports, and the risk of potential diversion of project resources. There are also wider 
portfolio risks including AML/CFT risks and limited access to project sites. These risks will be mitigated through a series of 
integrated approaches including strong collaboration with the EAFS and Office of the Accountant General to address 
inadequate capacity at the PIU and ensure the timely submission of accurate IFRs to the World Bank. Ongoing capacity 
support to the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) through engagement of a private audit firm to support the audit of 
World Bank-financed projects in the portfolio will continue. The project will provide support for the implementation of 
the amended AML/CFT Law (expected in 2025) to address AML/CFT risks. Fiduciary oversight will be enhanced through 
regular internal audits conducted by the internal audit function in the MoF and annual external audits conducted by the 
OAG with TA from a contracted private audit firm. The residual FM risk is therefore considered Substantial.
=== PAGE 37 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 23  
 
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate 
Legal Operational Policies 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64. 
The main risks and impacts are associated with ID registration activities (Subcomponent 1.2), which will build on 
ongoing activities for the development of the foundational digital ID system in Somalia, and the financial services to be 
provided to MSMEs (Subcomponent 3.1). Environmental risk and impact are considered Moderate with construction or 
rehabilitation works foreseen. Activities associated with environmental risks relate to data privacy, cybersecurity, and the 
disposal of e-waste, including obsolete electronic devices used in activities like ID registration and payment systems. There 
are also contextual occupational health and safety (OHS) risks to workers and the community during ID registration 
exercises under Component 1. Potential risks include those under the risk-sharing platform if projects with environmental 
footprints receive support, and potential downstream environmental and social risks associated with type 2 and 3 
technical assistance (TA) activities under Component 1, which address regulatory and policy constraints. The social risk is 
considered Substantial. The main risks include: (a) potential exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in ID 
registration services, financial product services, and training and capacity-building activities; (b) labor risks including OHS 
and security risks, sexual harassment, and other forms of gender-based violence (GBV) that may occur during ID 
registration activities and capacity-building activities, when seeking financial services, and during interaction of ministry 
employees with contractors; (c) possible elite capture of project benefits; and (d) contextual FCV operational environment 
that will potentially limit effective CE and trusted GRM and might exclude the hard-to-serve community members (such 
as minorities, people with disabilities, widows, internally displaced persons, and pastoralists). The instruments prepared 
include the ESCP which was disclosed on the World Bank external website on March 23, 2025, and the SEP which was 
disclosed on the World Bank external website on March 4, 2025. On the government side, the ESCP was disclosed in-
country on March 22, 2025, while the SEP was disclosed in-country on March 11, 2025. Stakeholder consultations were 
held in-country on November 14, 2024, and were attended by various stakeholders including community members. The 
GBV, sexual exploitation and abuse/harassment (SEAH), risk is rated substantial due to national ID registration including 
contextual factors that exacerbate the GBV risks due to predominantly peri-urban and rural sites for ID registration and 
weaker mitigation systems. To mitigate these risks, SEAH mitigation measures will be incorporated in the NIRA strategy 
and relevant project documents. The Government will also prepare the Labor Management Procedures and e-waste 
management plan and incorporate relevant E&S aspects. The project will build on the Environmental and Social 
Management System developed for Gargaara to identify, assess, and manage environmental and social risks for the risk-
sharing platform. For security risks, the existing system established under SCALED-UP will be upgraded according to the 
latest risk-based guidance.  
D. Grievance Redress Service 
65. 
Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project 
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address 
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s 
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm 
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
=== PAGE 38 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 24  
 
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute 
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention 
of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit 
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how 
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
V. 
KEY RISKS 
 
Description of Risk 
Mitigation Measure 
Rating 
Political and Governance 
FGS continues to have limited operational capacity and 
physical reach into the country, affected by the prevalence of 
illicit groups such as Al-Shabaab. There are also risks 
associated with continuing political contestation among 
federal government institutions and between the FGS and the 
FMS. Furthermore, corruption is prevalent at all levels in the 
public and private sectors. 
SPRING Project includes multipronged mitigation 
measures into its design, including the 
strengthening of FM systems and of core fiduciary 
and contract management institutional capacities, 
and a key coordination role to be played by the 
PSC. 
High 
Macroeconomic 
Despite steady improvements in the revenue collection in 
recent years, the risk of economic shocks further damaging 
the country’s already volatile economy is high. Economic 
activity is likely to have significant risks related to insecurity in 
Mogadishu and southern Somalia. Given the FGS’s limited 
capacity to dampen economic disruptions, the risk of MSMEs 
having to absorb their full impact is high. Revenue fluctuations 
and the resulting potential increase of nonperforming loans 
(NPLs) in the banking sector pose direct risks to project 
implementation, particularly in enhancing access to finance. 
Ongoing work under other World Bank-financed 
projects will support increased revenue 
mobilization and increase macroeconomic 
stability. SPRING Project would also build on 
activities currently implemented in other World 
Bank-financed projects—for example, DRIVE and 
SCALED-UP — to manage financial sector stability 
risks. 
High 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
Potential fragmentation of development partner support is a 
risk. While project preparation reflects a highly consultative 
process, it will be necessary to maintain dialogue with other 
donors throughout project implementation. There is also a 
substantial risk that the project may not be implemented in 
the most effective and efficient manner, given political 
economy challenges of anticompetitive practices by well-
connected conglomerates, and complications with reform 
implementation given the corruption, infrastructure 
deficiencies, and other systemic challenges. 
Targeted support to strengthen MDAs’ 
institutional capacity to mitigate risks related to 
efficient project implementation. Active 
collaboration through development partners 
engagement platforms will also be conducted to 
mitigate risks related to fragmentation. 
Substantial 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
SPRING’s reform agenda is ambitious, with multiple 
components cutting across key institutions and regional 
governments, while Somalia’s administrative and sectoral 
institutions have limited ability to absorb resources and 
human capital at a rapid pace, and the required intra- and 
intergovernmental coordination is weak. 
Reforms will be introduced gradually to ensure 
government ownership and incremental capacity 
building tailored to the context. Implementation 
teams and TA will mitigate the complexity of risks. 
Close monitoring of work plans by the PSC and 
World Bank will be critical. 
Substantial
=== PAGE 39 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
Page 25  
 
Description of Risk 
Mitigation Measure 
Rating 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
Despite substantial progress, the Government’s capacity and 
resources remain limited. Recently established entities, such 
as NIRA, will require additional support in coordination with 
the MoF to ensure fiscal sustainability.  
The PIU housed at the MoF has demonstrated the 
ability to successfully implement the ongoing 
SCALED-UP and DRIVE projects. SPRING Project 
will support continued institutional capacity 
building at key beneficiary MDAs. It will also 
allocate resources to strengthen the PIU’s 
capabilities in E&S practices and M&E, including 
the use of an independent monitoring agent. 
Project activities also consider appropriate 
institutional mandates of new institutions, 
adequate sources of funds to meet capital and 
operational costs, and strong governance 
arrangements for long-term sustainability. 
Substantial 
Fiduciary 
 
 
Somalia’s accountability systems are still evolving. For 
instance, there is a lack of key FM competencies and strong 
internal controls, reliance on consultants, a weak and 
fragmented country PFM legal framework, no correspondent 
banking relationships (CBRs) for commercial banks, a 
developing payment system infrastructure, and increasing 
government use of digital financial services to facilitate local 
payments—including from some World Bank-funded 
activities. 
The World Bank will continue to maximize 
disbursements under the project directly to 
vendors, minimize DA balances, conduct intensive 
FM monitoring through reconciliation of project 
and bank accounts and deployment of in-country 
monitoring arrangements, and support capacity 
building of national PFM oversight institutions. 
Improving Somalia’s payment system 
infrastructure, promoting CBRs, and 
strengthening oversight of cross-border 
transactions will also help mitigate these risks. 
Substantial 
Environment and Social 
Key risks relate to exclusion from project benefits; labor risks 
including OHS; sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual 
harassment; all forms of GBV; security, safety, and well-being 
of workers and project-affected communities; and insufficient 
e-waste management. 
Continued use of the experienced SCALED-UP PIU 
will help mitigate these risks. To mitigate the PIU’s 
limited experience with the ESF, SPRING Project 
will support capacity building at the PIU and key 
MDAs to establish clear protocols for E&S 
monitoring and reporting and ensure effective 
coordination mechanisms are in place. All E&S 
commitments have been included in the ESCP and 
there will be regular monitoring and reporting on 
performance. 
Substantial 
Stakeholders 
The current context in Somalia is characterized by the lack of 
trust between key groups in society, and the accompanying 
high levels of contestation. Opposition from stakeholders (civil 
society, private sector organizations, other donors, and other 
members of the public) is possible. If the vested interests of 
respective parties are incompatible or where other 
stakeholders cannot, or will not, accept a common position, 
this can potentially have a negative impact on the 
achievement of the PDO. 
The project builds on continuous engagement 
with all stakeholders and civil society. 
Understanding the relative power and influence 
of different stakeholders will help reconcile their 
claims on the project. The project’s GRM would 
help manage grievances from communities and 
the private sector. 
Substantial 
Overall Program Risk 
High
=== PAGE 40 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 26 
 
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate 
 
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
Baseline 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Closing Period 
Business enabling environment improved  
Number of new firms benefitting from reformed business registration requirements (cumulative) (Number of businesses)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
300 
1,500 
3,000 
4,500 
5,500 
➢of which are women-owned (Percentage)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
30 
30 
30 
30 
30 
People with digitally verifiable identification (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
500,000 
1,500,000 
3,000,000 
4,000,000 
5,000,000 
➢of which are women (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
250,000 
750,000 
1,500,000 
2,000,000 
2,500,000 
Financial system strengthened  
Number of new bank accounts opened (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
50,000 
100,000 
180,000 
270,000 
400,000 
Access to finance enhanced  
Number of jobs created through the RSM and BDS (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Dec/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
- 
1,330 
- 
- 
2,250 
Number of businesses accessing credit with the support of the RSM (cumulative) (Number of businesses)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
150 
400 
600 
900 
1,100 
Intermediate Indicators by Components
=== PAGE 41 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 27 
 
Baseline 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Closing Period 
Comp. 1: Improving the enabling environment for the private sector  
Number of new or amended laws and regulations improving the business enabling environment enacted (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
1 
2 
5 
8 
11 
Number of new public and private service providers using NIRA digital identity verification services (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Number of people whose identity is verified using the digital ID (annual) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
30,000 
65,000 
105,000 
150,000 
200,000 
Percentage of customer support and grievance redress service requests addressed per year by NIRA (Percentage)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
80 
90 
100 
100 
100 
Comp. 2: Deepening financial sector reforms and strengthening institutional capacity  
Number of new loans for MSMEs provided by Gargaara (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
500 
1,000 
1,750 
2,500 
3,000 
Value of new disbursements to MSMEs by Gargaara (cumulative) (Amount(USD))  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
5,000,000 
13,000,000 
18,000,000 
24,000,000 
30,000,000 
Number of regulations linked to new laws and policy guidance related to the financial sector issued (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
2 
5 
8 
11 
15 
Number of transactions processed through the SIPS (annual) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
3,300,000 
4,500,000 
6,000,000 
7,000,000 
10,000,000 
Value of transactions through the SIPS (annual) (Amount(USD))  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
33,000,000 
45,000,000 
60,000,000 
70,000,000 
100,000,000 
PBC 1: Macroprudential framework strengthened (Yes/No) PBC  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
=== PAGE 42 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 28 
 
PBC 2: Financial sector data collection, analysis, and transparency improved (Yes/No) PBC  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
PBC 3: Expanded oversight of financial systems (Yes/No) PBC  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
PBC 4: Consolidated supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions (Yes/No) PBC  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
PBC 5: Improved access to financial services through better risk assessment of borrowers (Yes/No) PBC  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
No 
No 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Comp. 3: Enhancing access to finance and resilience for MSMEs  
Number of RSM-supported loans for women-owned/managed MSMEs (cumulative) (Number)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
45 
120 
180 
270 
330 
Value of RSM-supported loans for women-owned/managed MSMEs (cumulative) (Amount(USD))  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
675,000 
1,500,000 
2,400,000 
3,300,000 
4,300,000 
Amount of private capital enabled through the RSM (cumulative) (Amount(USD))  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
4,500,000 
10,000,000 
16,000,000 
22,000,000 
29,000,000 
Number of MSMEs benefitting from BDS (cumulative) (Number of businesses)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
400 
800 
1,200 
1,600 
2,000 
➢of which of women-owned/managed businesses (Percentage)  
May/2025 
Jun/2026 
Jun/2027 
Jun/2028 
Jun/2029 
Jun/2030 
0 
25 
25 
25 
25 
25 
Comp. 4: Project Management  
Performance-based Conditions (PBC) 
Period 
Period Definition
=== PAGE 43 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 29 
 
Period 1 
2025 
Period 2 
2026 
Period 3 
2027 
Period 4 
2028 
Period 5 
2029 
Period 6 
2030 
Baseline 
Period 1 
Period 2 
Period 3 
Period 4 
Period 5 
Period 6 
1:PBC 1: Macroprudential framework strengthened (Yes/No ) 
No 
Macroprudential 
framework to 
monitor, assess, and 
mitigate systemic risks 
approved by the CBS 
Board and 
implementation plan 
operationalized 
(Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2027) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
750,000.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
PBC allocation 
750,000.00 
As a % of Total PBC Allocation  
12.5% 
2:PBC 2: Financial sector data collection, analysis, and transparency improved (Yes/No ) 
No 
Consolidated Financial 
Soundness Indicator 
Data (FSI) is published 
on the CBS website, 
with expanded IMF FSI 
data coverage 
(including all licensed 
banks) (Expected to be 
completed by August 
2026) 
Consolidated FSI data 
is published on the 
CBS website, with 
expanded IMF FSI data 
coverage (including all 
licensed banks and 
other licensed 
financial institutions) 
(Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2028) 
0.00 
0.00 
500,000.00 
0.00 
500,000.00 
0.00 
0.00
=== PAGE 44 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 30 
 
PBC allocation 
1,000,000.00 
As a % of Total PBC Allocation  
16.67% 
3:PBC 3: Expanded oversight of financial systems (Yes/No ) 
No 
Regulation issued by 
CBS on Safeguarding 
of Mobile Money 
Funds (Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2026) 
Regulation issued by 
CBS relating to Savings 
and Credit 
Cooperative Societies 
(SACCOs) (Expected to 
be completed by 
December 2027) 
At least 5 
microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) and 
1 SACCO licensed by 
CBS (Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2028)  
Regular offsite 
supervision for all 
licensed MFIs and 
SACCOs conducted 
and onsite 
examinations 
completed for at least 
2 MFIs and 1 SACCOs 
(Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2029) 
0.00 
0.00 
400,000.00 
350,000.00 
250,000.00 
250,000.00 
0.00 
PBC allocation 
1,250,000.00 
As a % of Total PBC Allocation  
20.83% 
4:PBC 4: Consolidated supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions (Yes/No ) 
No 
Regulation to 
undertake 
consolidated 
supervision and 
financial reporting of 
financial groups is 
issued by the CBS 
(Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2027) 
CBS has completed 
consolidated 
supervision of at least 
1 financial group 
(comprising one of the 
four largest banks in 
terms of assets at the 
end of previous 
calendar year) 
(Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2028) 
CBS has completed 
consolidated 
supervision of at least 
2 additional financial 
groups (comprising at 
least one additional 
bank from the four 
largest banks in terms 
of assets at the end of 
previous calendar 
year) (Expected to be 
completed by 
December 2029) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,000,000.00 
500,000.00 
500,000.00 
0.00 
PBC allocation 
2,000,000.00 
As a % of Total PBC Allocation  
33.33% 
5:PBC 5: Improved access to financial services through better risk assessment of borrowers (Yes/No ) 
No 
Credit Information 
System (CIS) 
framework developed 
and approved by the 
CIS launched with at 
least 4 banks 
connected and 
contributing to data 
CIS being used by at 
least 4 banks 
contributing and 
accessing credit
=== PAGE 45 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
Page 31 
 
CBS board (Expected 
to be completed by 
December 2025) 
collection (Expected to 
be completed by 
December 2026) 
information 
consistently over 3 
months (Expected to 
be completed by 
December 2027) 
0.00 
250,000.00 
500,000.00 
250,000.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
PBC allocation 
1,000,000.00 
As a % of Total PBC Allocation  
16.67%
=== PAGE 46 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes 
 
Business enabling environment improved 
Number of new firms benefitting from reformed business registration requirements (% of which are women-owned) (cumulative)  
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of new firms that register on the SBRS online platform. 
 
Once the new legal and regulatory framework for business registration and licensing is adopted, all the firms in the SBRS 
can be assumed to benefit from reformed business registration and licensing requirements as they will need, at 
minimum, to apply for new licenses through the SBRS every year. However, only new firms in the SBRS will be recorded 
as part of this project. 
 
The number of firms already in the SBRS is expected to be around 6,000 by May 2025.  
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
SBRS reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
The SBRS focal point will generate reports from the SBRS indicating the total number of firms in the SBRS. The data will 
be gender disaggregated. 
 
Determining the number of new firms in the SBRS will consist of subtracting the baseline (firms already in the SBRS 
before the project starts) from the total number of firms in the SBRS. 
 
MoCI will be in charge of determining the baseline for this indicator. It will also need to prevent double counting as other 
World Bank-financed operations will be ongoing when the project starts (that is, SCALED-UP). 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoCI 
People with digitally verifiable identification (of which are women) (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of new people who register in the foundational digital ID system. It does not include 
people that registered under SCALED-UP. 
 
It is estimated that approximately 175,000 people will be registered in the foundational ID system by May 2025. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
Digital ID system reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
NIRA will generate reports regarding the number of people registered in the digital ID system. The data will be gender 
disaggregated. 
 
Determining the number of new people registered in the digital ID system will consist of subtracting the baseline (people 
already in the digital ID system) from the total number of people registered in the digital ID system. 
 
NIRA will be in charge of determining the baseline for this indicator. It will also need to prevent double counting as other 
World Bank-financed operations will be ongoing when the project starts (that is, SCALED-UP). 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
NIRA 
Financial system strengthened 
Number of new bank accounts opened (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of new bank accounts opened during the project’s implementation. 
 
It is estimated that approximately 1,200,000 bank accounts will already be open by May 2025. 
Frequency 
Semiannually 
Data source 
CBS surveys 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
CBS will conduct periodic surveys to determine the number of new accounts opened during the project’s 
implementation.
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 
 
Determining the number of new bank accounts opened will consist of subtracting the baseline (already existing bank 
accounts) from the total number of bank accounts determined through the surveys. 
 
CBS will be in charge of determining the baseline for this indicator.  
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
Access to finance enhanced 
Number of businesses accessing credit with the support of the RSM (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator is linked to the CRI: People and businesses using financial services. It specifically measures the number 
businesses accessing credit with the support of the RSM. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs are required to provide quarterly reports to the entity managing the RSM. These reports will need to clearly indicate 
the number of businesses benefiting from loans through the RSM. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Entity managing the RSM 
Number of jobs created through the RSM and BDS (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator is linked to the CRI: New or better jobs. It tracks the estimated number of new jobs created by firms 
benefitting from loans through the RSM or BDS.  
Frequency 
Twice (midterm review and end of project) 
Data source 
Beneficiaries loan applications, BDS participation forms, and surveys 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
At the time of application/registration for an RSM-supported loan or BDS, firms will need to indicate on their 
application/registration forms the number of employees they currently have and the number of employees they expect 
to hire after receiving the services. 
 
They will also be required to provide their contact information and consent to be contacted by the service providers for 
this activity (for example, entity managing RSM, entity managing BDS, PFIs, BDS provider, PIU, and/or survey firm). 
 
As the project nears the midterm review, the PIU will enable the hiring of a survey firm to follow up with the businesses 
that benefitted from the services and determine the number of new jobs created. The same operation will be reiterated 
toward the end of the project. 
 
It is estimated that the project could generate 1,300 and 30 jobs through the RSM and BDS, respectively, by midterm 
review and 1,750 and 500 jobs by the end of the project, respectively. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
PIU - in coordination with entities managing the RSM/BDS and service providers (for example, PFIs and BDS provider) 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
Component 1: Improving the enabling environment for the private sector 
Number of new or amended laws and regulations improving the business enabling environment enacted (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of laws and regulations improving the business-enabling environment enacted by the 
Parliament (for laws) or approved by the Minister of Commerce and Industry (for regulations). MoCI expects to enact at 
least 5 laws and 6 regulations (11 in total). 
 
The laws and regulations expected to be enacted during the project are the Commercial Registration and Licensing Law 
regulations, the National Insolvency Policy and Law (and its regulation), the Trust Law (and its regulation), the Arbitration 
Law (and its regulation), the Trade Remedies Act (and its regulation), and the SMEs Policy and Act (and its regulation). 
Additional or replacement laws and regulations may be considered as the project is implemented.  
Frequency 
Quarterly
=== PAGE 48 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 
 
Data source 
MoCI reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
MoCI will be responsible for tracking and providing regular updates about the development, steps taken toward 
enactment, and implementation for the laws and regulations supported by the project. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
MoCI 
Number of new public and private service providers using NIRA digital identity verification services (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of new government agencies and private service providers (for example, banks) that use 
NIRA’s identity verification service linked to the digital ID. 
 
It is expected that at least two service providers will be using NIRA’s digital identity verification service by May 2025. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
Partnership agreements with entities using NIRA services 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Access to NIRA identity verification services will be subject to signing of an agreement. Signing of the agreement will 
serve as proof that the partnering entity has access to NIRA identity verification services. 
 
Determining the number of new service providers will consist of subtracting the baseline (already existing partnerships) 
from the total number of service providers with access to NIRA’s identity verification service. 
 
NIRA will be in charge of determining the baseline for this indicator. It will also be required to report whether the entities 
are actively using the system. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
NIRA 
Number of people whose identity is verified using the digital ID (annual) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of people whose identity is verified using the digital ID at least once during the year. This 
indicator only collects the number of unique users of the system. 
 
It is expected that 1,056 people will have used the digital ID system to verify their identity by May 2025. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
Digital ID/identity verification system reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
NIRA will generate reports from the digital ID/identity verification system indicating the number of people whose identity 
is verified at least once using the digital ID. 
 
Reporting will occur on a quarterly basis, but the targets are annual and noncumulative. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
NIRA 
Percentage of customer support and grievance redress service requests addressed per year by NIRA 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of customer support and GRS requests addressed by NIRA. NIRA already benefits from a 
GRS and will establish a customer support platform (for example, hot line). 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
Customer service platform and GRS reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
NIRA will monitor and report the total number of requests addressed and the total number of requests received through 
the two systems. Those two numbers will be used to compute the percentage for this composite indicator. 
 
NIRA will also be required to periodically provide logs of those two systems displaying the numbers listed above to 
demonstrate the accuracy of their reporting.  
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
NIRA 
Component 2: Deepening financial sector reforms and strengthening institutional capacity 
Number of new loans for MSMEs provided by Gargaara (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of loans provided by PFIs using Gargaara’s funding. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports
=== PAGE 49 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 
 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs are required to provide detailed lending information to Gargaara. Those reports will specifically indicate the number 
of loans provided to firms. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Gargaara 
Value of new disbursements to MSMEs by Gargaara (cumulative) (US$) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the value of disbursements provided by PFIs using Gargaara’s funding. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs are required to provide detailed lending information to Gargaara. These reports will specifically indicate the value of 
loans provided to firms. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Gargaara 
Number of regulations linked to new laws and policy guidance related to the financial sector issued (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of regulations linked to new laws and policy guidance (including frameworks 
development) related to the financial sector issued. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
CBS regulations, frameworks, and guidance notes repository 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
For this indicator, the issuance is determined when the regulations, framework, and guidance are approved by the 
Central Bank Governor and published on the CBS website. CBS will be required to provide quarterly updates about the 
development of key regulations, frameworks, and policy guidance as well as their issuance/publication and 
implementation. 
 
CBS is currently expecting to develop the following regulations, frameworks, and guidance during the project’s 
implementation: 
 
a) MFIs: 1. Licensing and Supervision Regulation; b) Takaful/Insurance Institutions: 2. Licensing Regulation, 3. AML/CFT 
Regulation/Guideline, 4. Regulation on Financial Reporting, 5. Regulation on Capital Requirement, 6. Regulation on 
Management of Takaful Funds; c) Foreign Exchange Bureaus: 7. Licensing and Operations Regulation; d) Payment 
Services: 8. Licensing of Payment Service Providers, 9. Issuance of electronic money, 10. Safeguarding of Mobile Money 
Funds, 11. Regulatory capital for different classes of operators and Payment Service Providers; e) Regulations on Banking 
Supervision: 12. Significant Exposures; 13. Regulatory framework to undertake consolidated supervision issued by the 
CBS requiring consolidated financial reporting; 14. Credit Reference Bureau Regulation; 15. Macroprudential framework 
to monitor, assess, and mitigate systemic risks; f) Other Regulations: 16. SACCOs regulation, 17. Climate/Green Finance 
Framework/Guidance; 18. Development Finance Business Regulation, 19. Consumer Protection Regulation/Guidelines. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
Number of transactions processed through the SIPS (annual) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of transactions through the SIPS. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
SIPS reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
CBS will be required to monitor the number of transactions through the SIPS and prepare reports providing such data. 
 
Reporting will occur on a quarterly basis, but the targets are annual and noncumulative. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
Value of transactions through the SIPS (annual) (US$) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the value of transactions through the SIPS. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
SIPS reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
CBS will be required to monitor the value of transactions through the SIPS and prepare reports providing such data. 
 
Reporting will occur on a quarterly basis, but the targets are annual and noncumulative.
=== PAGE 50 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 
 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
PBC 1: Macroprudential framework strengthened  
Description 
This indicator tracks progress relating to the development of a macroprudential framework. 
Frequency 
Ad hoc 
Data source 
Verification protocol for PBC 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Verification protocol for PBC 1. 
 
CBS will hire an IVA to verify the completion of the PBC. While verifications will occur at intervals to be determined, CBS 
will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress toward the completion of the PBC. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
PBC 2: Financial sector data collection, analysis and transparency improved  
Description 
This indicator tracks progress toward the collection, analysis, and publication of FSI data (including IMF FSI expanded 
coverage) from all licensed financial institutions on the CBS website. 
Frequency 
Ad hoc 
Data source 
Verification protocol for PBC 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Verification protocol for PBC 2 
 
CBS will hire an IVA to verify the completion of the PBC. While verifications will occur at intervals to be determined, CBS 
will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress toward the completion of the PBC. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
PBC 3: Expanded oversight of financial system 
Description 
This indicator tracks progress toward the development of regulations on safeguarding mobile money funds as well as 
SACCOs. It also monitors the licensing of MFIs and SACCOs as well as their off-site and on-site supervision.  
Frequency 
Ad hoc 
Data source 
Verification protocol for PBC 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Verification protocol for PBC 3 
 
CBS will hire an IVA to verify the completion of the PBC. While verifications will occur at intervals to be determined, CBS 
will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress toward the completion of the PBC. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
PBC 4: Consolidated supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions 
Description 
This indicator tracks the development of a regulatory framework for financial institutions supervision and its 
implementation. 
Frequency 
Ad hoc 
Data source 
Verification protocol for PBC 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Verification protocol for PBC 4 
 
CBS will hire an IVA to verify the completion of the PBC. While verifications will occur at intervals to be determined, CBS 
will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress toward the completion of the PBC. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
PBC 5: Improved access to financial services through better risk assessment of borrowers 
Description 
This indicator tracks progress toward the launch of a CIS and its implementation. 
Frequency 
Ad hoc 
Data source 
Verification protocol for PBC 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
Verification protocol for PBC 5
=== PAGE 51 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 
 
CBS will hire an IVA to verify the completion of the PBC. While verifications will occur at intervals to be determined, CBS 
will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress toward the completion of the PBC. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
CBS 
Component 3: Enhancing access to finance and resilience for MSMEs 
Number of RSM-supported loans for women-owned/managed MSMEs (cumulative) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of loans enabled through the RSM to women-owned/managed MSMEs only. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs will be required to provide quarterly reports to the entity managing the RSM. 
 
These reports will specifically disaggregate the number of loans provided to firms by gender. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Entity managing the RSM 
Value of RSM-supported loans for women-owned/managed MSMEs (cumulative) (US$) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the value of loans enabled through the RSM to women-owned/managed MSMEs only. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs will be required to provide quarterly reports to the entity managing the RSM. 
 
These reports will specifically disaggregate the number of loans provided to firms by gender. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Entity managing the RSM 
Amount of private capital enabled through the RSM (cumulative) (US$) 
Description 
This indicator tracks the amount of private capital that the RSM would enable. It specifically tracks the value of the loans 
derisked through the RSM.  
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
PFIs’ reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
PFIs will be required to provide quarterly reports to the entity managing the RSM. These reports will need to clearly 
indicate the value of the loans derisked through the RSM.  
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Entity managing the RSM 
Number of new MSMEs benefitting from BDS (% of which of women-owned/managed businesses) (cumulative)  
Description 
This indicator tracks the number of MSMEs benefitting from BDS. 
Frequency 
Quarterly 
Data source 
BDS registration forms/training reports 
Methodology for Data 
Collection  
The BDS provider will be required to maintain a list of all the MSMEs benefitting from the services (for example, 
registration forms and training reports). The data will be gender disaggregated. In coordination with the entity managing 
the BDS program and the PIU, it will be important to ensure that firms participating in phase 2 of the BDS program are 
not double counted. 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
BDS provider 
 
Verification Protocol: Performance-Based Conditions 
 
PBC 1: Macroprudential framework strengthened 
Description 
Macroprudential framework to monitor, assess, and mitigate systemic risks approved by the CBS board and 
implementation plan operationalized. 
Data source/ Agency 
CBS 
Verification Entity 
IVA
=== PAGE 52 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 
 
Procedure 
The CBS will send to the IVA the CBS board-approved macroprudential framework to monitor, assess, and mitigate 
systemic risks. It will also share the documents that prove that the framework was approved by the CBS board (or any 
other decision document as agreed with the World Bank). Lastly, it will provide a copy of the terms of reference of the 
Financial Stability Committee (FSC) and/or the overall standing policy committees approved by the CBS board as well as 
evidence of the meetings of the FSC (or other committees as agreed with the World Bank) over a period of at least 3 
months to demonstrate that the implementation plan is operationalized. Any addition documents/reports generated as 
part of the macroprudential monitoring could be also provided for review. 
PBC 2: Financial sector data collection, analysis and transparency improved 
Description 
a) Consolidated FSI data is published on the CBS website, with expanded IMF FSI data coverage (including all licensed 
banks), and b) consolidated FSI data is published on the CBS website, with expanded IMF FSI data coverage (including all 
licensed banks and other licensed financial institutions). 
Data source/ Agency 
CBS 
Verification Entity 
IVA 
Procedure 
The IVA will visit the CBS website to ensure that the consolidated FSI data is published for all licensed banks and other 
licensed financial institutions. The IVA will note that part a) only focuses on all licensed banks and part b) focuses on all 
licensed banks and other licensed financial institutions. The IVA will verify that the published consolidated FSI data 
include at least 12 of the following key indicators: 
 
A. Core FSIs for Deposit Takers (Commercial Banks): 1. Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets, 2. Tier 1 capital to 
risk-weighted assets, 3. NPLs net of provisions to capital, 4. NPLs net of provisions, 5. Total regulatory capital, 6. 
Common Equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, 7. Tier 1 capital to assets, 8. NPLs to total gross loans, 9. Provisions 
to NPLs, 10. Return on assets, 11. Return on equity, 12. Profit margin to gross income, 13. Noninterest expenses to gross 
income, 14. Liquid assets to total assets, and 15. Liquidity coverage ratio. 
 
B. Other Financial Institutions: 16. Other Financial Corporations’ assets to total financial assets and 17. Other Financial 
Corporations’ assets to GDP. 
 
The IVA will be granted the right to verify any additional documents to ensure the accuracy of the consolidated FSI data 
published on the CBS website and to check its alignment with the agreed FSI. 
PBC 3: Expanded oversight of financial system 
Description 
a) Regulation issued on Safeguarding of Mobile Money Funds, b) regulation issued relating to SACCOs, c) at least 5 MFIs 
and 1 SACCO licensed, and d) regular off-site supervision for all licensed MFIs and SACCOs conducted and on-site 
examinations completed for at least 2 MFIs and 1 SACCO. 
Data source/ Agency 
CBS 
Verification Entity 
IVA 
Procedure 
The CBS will share the final drafts of the two regulations on Safeguarding of Mobile Money Funds and SACCOs with the 
IVA. It will also share with the IVA the documents proving that the regulations have been approved by the CBS board (or 
any other decision document as agreed with the World Bank) and have been issued. The IVA will also verify the CBS 
website to ensure that the regulation is published. It will visit the CBS offices to physically verify the license certificates 
of the five MFIs and one SACCO as well as the off-site and on-site supervision reports to confirm that these are 
conducted on periodic / regular intervals (with off-site monitoring of data collected monthly and consolidated quarterly 
and on-site risk-based supervision). It will also be granted the right to check the necessary records and attachments 
(physical or electronic) to assess the thoroughness of the supervision activity. 
PBC 4: Consolidated supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions36 
Description 
a) Regulation to undertake consolidated supervision and financial reporting of financial groups is issued by the CBS, b) 
CBS has completed consolidated supervision of at least 1 financial group (comprising 1 of the 4 largest banks in terms of 
total assets at the end of previous calendar year), and c) CBS has completed consolidated supervision of at least 2 
additional financial groups (comprising at least 1 additional bank from the 4 largest banks in terms of total assets at the 
end of previous calendar year). 
 
36 Consolidated supervision of a financial group or financial conglomerate means that regulators assess the risks and financial stability of the entire financial 
group rather than just individual entities (banks, insurance, MFIs, and so on), to ensure the group is financially sound as a whole and does not pose systemic 
risks to the financial system.
=== PAGE 53 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 
 
Data source/ Agency 
CBS 
Verification Entity 
IVA 
Procedure 
The CBS will share the final draft of the regulation for consolidated supervision and financial reporting of financial groups 
with the IVA. It will also share any document proving that this regulation was approved by the CBS board (or any other 
decision document as agreed with the World Bank). The IVA will visit the CBS website to ensure that the regulation is 
published. It will also visit the CBS offices to physically verify the on-site supervision reports upon their completion. It 
will also be granted the right to check the necessary records and attachments (physical or electronic) to assess the 
thoroughness of the supervision activity. 
PBC 5: Improved access to financial services through better risk assessment of borrowers 
Description 
(a) CIS framework developed and approved by the CBS board, (b) CIS launched with at least 4 banks connected and 
contributing to data collection, and (c) CIS being used by at least 4 banks contributing and accessing credit information 
consistently over 3 months. 
Data source/ Agency 
CBS 
Verification Entity 
IVA 
Procedure 
The CBS will share the final draft of the CIS framework with the IVA. It will also share the board resolution approving the 
framework with the IVA (or any other decision document as agreed with the World Bank). It will also enable a technical 
visit from the IVA to show the system’s functionalities and its integration with banks to confirm that the CIS is 
launched/operational with 4 banks connected and contributing to data collection for the CIS. Furthermore, it will share 
the consolidated reports of the 4 banks connected to the CIS spanning over 3 months summarizing the CIS-related 
activity, information collection and exchanges (expected to include positive and negative information on customers), 
and overall operational performance.
=== PAGE 54 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 
 
ANNEX 2. ADDITIONAL TABLES  
 
Table A1. Summary of the CBS program 
Component 
Subcomponent 
Category 
Activity 
Program 
Costs 
($US) 
IPF Input-
Based 
Financing 
PBC-Based Financing 
PBC Results 
Contribution 
(Procurable) 
(Non-
procurable) 
PBC 1, 2, 
3,4,5 
2. Deepening 
financial 
sector 
reforms and 
strengthening 
institutional 
capacity 
2.2 
Strengthening 
financial sector 
stability, 
integrity, and 
infrastructure 
Strengthening 
financial sector 
oversight and 
policy 
implementation 
This category will cover 
activities to support policy 
developmenta  
14,000,000 
14,000,000 
- 
- 
Incentivizing 
financial sector 
reforms 
Economic Policy Outreachb 
400,000 
- 
 
400,000 
Hiring staff and consultantsc 
1,500,000 
- 
1,000,000 
500,000 
Skills 
development/certificationsd 
1,150,000 
- 
- 
1,150,000 
Training 
1,300,000 
- 
- 
1,300,000 
Study visitse 
1,300,000 
- 
- 
1,300,000 
Software and licensesf 
50,000 
- 
- 
50,000 
Policy Development and 
Translation 
900,000 
- 
- 
900,000 
Enhancement of 
financial 
infrastructure 
This category will cover 
activities to upgrade the 
financial sector’s 
infrastructuref   
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
- 
- 
Total 
25,600,000 
19,000,000 
1,000,000 
5,600,000 
 
Notes:  
a The detailed activity package will be outlined in the project’s annual workplans in consultation with the World Bank. 
b Economic policy outreach expenditures relate to the organization of the CBS Annual Conference on Economic Policies 2025-2030. The costs include event 
management, publications, peer reviewers, best paper awards, travel expenses of event guests within Somalia and outside, and other incidental costs related to the 
event. 
c The CBS will also have expenditures related to the hiring of new and/or well-trained personnel. Salary costs as well as recruitment and onboarding expenses are 
covered by staff hiring expenses. Other forms of expenses for a merit-based competitive selection process include job advertising, shortlisting, reference checks, 
recruiting expenses. New hires will also need work tools, office supplies, software licenses, and other IT tools. 
d Continued skill development is essential for CBS employees. As a result, the CBS ensures that staff members remain current on job-related best practices and new 
technologies by enabling them to acquire professional certifications, Moreover, all initiatives for certification of skills will follow CBS's HR internal policy to ensure 
relevance, fairness, and conformity with business objectives. Eligible expenses under this category will include training courses for certifications (Cisco Certified 
Network Associate, Cisco Certified DevNet Professional, Certified Fraud Examiner, Certified Internal Auditor, Association of Chartered Certified Accountants, etc.), 
seminars, and workshops meant to raise staff members' competencies and skills, including professional certifications. This activity also covers attendance to high-
level conferences, knowledge-sharing events, and capacity-building initiatives, including those supported by development partners. Furthermore, considered 
qualified are expenses related to online learning environments, coaching sessions, and tailored development initiatives appropriate for the corporate operational 
needs. Costs for training materials, exam fees, travel expenses could also be included provided they complement the strategic goals of the CBS. 
e Study visits foster knowledge sharing, capacity building, and exposure to best practices in relevant sectors, their cost is considered as eligible expenditure. These 
study visits will adhere to CBS's HR internal policy to ensure relevance, openness, and match with organizational goals. Under this category, eligible expenses include 
participants’ local transportation, airfare, lodging, and daily allowances. It also covers site visits, academic program registration fees, and meetings with key 
businesses and partners. Furthermore, considered eligible are costs for translating services, learning materials, and documentation tools—should they be required. 
f The CBS will also acquire software and related licenses necessary for the performance of its duties. At present, the CBS plans on acquiring software licenses for 
Stata, Stat Transfer, and EViews. The CBS may also consider other software as necessary. Expenditures will also encompass related support services, enhancements, 
and training courses required to maximize the value of these tools. Purchasing these software licenses will enable the CBS in providing high-quality research and 
reporting, increasing data accuracy, and sharpening analytical skills.
=== PAGE 55 ===
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Productive, Resilient, and Inclusive Growth (SPRING) Project (P501662) 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 
 
Table A2. Gender analysis results chain 
Gender Gap 
Analysis 
Actions 
Indicators 
PDO Target 
Access to 
formal 
registration 
of businesses 
Most women-owned 
businesses are informal 
and micro/small in size, 
and the legal/regulatory 
framework does not 
facilitate their 
registration. 
Support dissemination of new 
legal/regulatory framework to facilitate 
the registration of micro/small 
enterprises. 
 
Develop information campaigns to raise 
awareness of the SBRS for women-
owned businesses. 
Number of new firms 
benefitting from reformed 
business registration 
requirements (% of which are 
women-owned) (cumulative) 
Yes 
5,500 
(30%) 
Access to 
identification 
Women face issues with 
obtaining identification 
due to structural barriers, 
traditional gender roles, 
and clan-based customs. 
Develop information campaigns to raise 
awareness of the ID system for women. 
 
Diversify the type of registration sites to 
enable maximum coverage and facilitate 
physical access (including partnerships 
with financial institutions). 
People with digitally 
verifiable identification (of 
which are women) 
(cumulative) 
Yes 
5 
million 
(2.5 
million) 
Access to 
finance 
Women-owned/managed 
businesses struggle with 
accessing financing due to 
financial institutions’ 
perceptions of risk. 
Establish an RSM to derisk loans of PFIs, 
with increased coverage for women-
owned/managed businesses. 
 
Develop information campaigns to 
support the uptake of loans by women-
owned/managed businesses through 
SPRING Project supported mechanisms. 
Number of RSM-supported 
loans for women-
owned/managed MSMEs 
(cumulative) 
No 
330 
Value of RSM-supported 
loans for women-
owned/managed MSMEs 
(US$, million) (cumulative) 
No 
4.3 
Vulnerability 
to shocks 
Women-owned/managed 
businesses in Somalia are 
particularly vulnerable to 
shocks. 
Offer BDS to women-owned/managed 
businesses to enhance their resilience, 
specifically climate shocks. 
 
Promote BDS to women-
owned/managed businesses through 
awareness-raising activities. 
Number of MSMEs 
benefitting from BDS (% of 
which are women-
owned/managed businesses) 
(cumulative) 
No 
2,000 
(25%)
