=== PAGE 1 ===
COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
CREATING MARKETS  
IN SOMALIA
Unlocking private sector-led growth at a critical juncture of So
Unlocking private sector-led growth at  
a critical juncture of Somalia's development
June 2024
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
=== PAGE 2 ===
About IFC 
IFC — a member of the World Bank Group — is the largest global development institution focused on the 
private sector in emerging markets. We work in more than 100 countries, using our capital, expertise, and 
influence to create markets and opportunities in developing countries. In fiscal year 2023, IFC committed a 
record $43.7 billion to private companies and financial institutions in developing countries, leveraging the 
power of the private sector to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity as economies grapple with 
the impacts of global compounding crises. For more information, visit www.ifc.org.
© International Finance Corporation 2024. All rights reserved.  
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, D.C. 20433  
www.ifc.org
The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work with-
out permission may be a violation of applicable law. IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or 
completeness of the content included in this work, or for the conclusions or judgments described herein, 
and accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions or errors (including, without limitation, ty-
pographical errors and technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The findings, 
interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the Interna-
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) or the governments they represent.
=== PAGE 3 ===
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS	
I
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS	
 II
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	
IV
Country Context	
IV
State of the Private Sector	
VI
Cross-Cutting Policy Constraints	
VII
Bottlenecks in Enabling Sectors	
IX
Recommendations	
XIII
Notes	
XVI
1.  COUNTRY CONTEXT	
1
1.1	
Fragility and Conflict Dynamics	
1
1.2	 Macroeconomic Considerations	
8
Notes	
11
2.  STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR	
14
2.1	 Private Sector's Concentration in Nontradable Sectors	
15
2.2	 Market Capture by a Few Large Conglomerates	
20
2.3	 Missing Middle of Business in Somalia	
22
2.4	 Low Economic Integration and the Minimal Complexity 
of Foreign Direct Investment	
25
Notes	
27
3.  CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING  
      THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA	
32
3.1	
Deficient Formal Institutional and Regulatory Frameworks	
33
3.2	 Outsized Role of Informal Institutions	
39
3.3	 Corruption	
40
3.4	 Prevalence of Competing Alternative Governance Arrangements	
41
3.5	 Lack of an Effective and Inclusive National Public-Private  
Dialogue Mechanism	
42
Notes	
44
=== PAGE 4 ===
4.  CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR	
48
4.1	
Transport and Logistics	
48
4.2	 Digital Connectivity	
52
4.3	 Access to Water	
56
4.4	 Education and Skills for Jobs	
59
4.5	 Access to Business Services	
65
Notes	
66
5.  ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGH POTENTIAL  
      TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA'S DEVELOPMENT	
71
5.1  Electricity Sector	
72
5.2 Financial Sector	
82
Notes	
99
6.  COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS	
105
=== PAGE 5 ===
|  I  |
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Somalia Country Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD) was prepared by a World Bank 
Group team led by Asta Bareisaite, Juan Andrés Cartwright, and Mounir Bari. Other 
team members include Sameer Goyal, Magidu Nyende, Kalton Mohamed Hassan, 
Tewodros Dessie, Asad Khalid Abdi, and Yann Ehrhard. The report was prepared under 
the leadership and guidance of World Bank Group management, including Keith Hansen, 
Cheick-Oumar Sylla, Mona Haddad, Denis Medvedev, Paolo Mauro, Amena Arif, 
Kristina Svensson, Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani, Stephan Dreyhaupt, and Zeinab Partow.
The team is grateful for valuable insights, guidance, and technical inputs provided 
throughout the preparation of the report by Anne Margreth Bakilana, Ragini Praful 
Dalal, Marek Hanusch, and Peter Ngwa Taniform. The team also benefitted from 
contributions provided by: Yosuke Kotsuji, Makiko Watanabe, Pedro Cerdan-Infantes, 
Ganesh Rasagam, Jana Kunicova, Abel Brook, Adam Stone Diehl, Alejandro Espinosa-
Wang, Alma Nurshaikova, Benjamin Herzberg, Chantal Richey, Christopher De Serio, 
Edwin Mbugua Munene, Elizabeth Kibaki, Emre Bayarlar, Isabella Hayward, James Muli 
Musinga, John Randa, Julien Francois Million, Khevna Viresh Naran, Leonard Mutuku 
Matheka, Lili Sisombat, Matthias Mayr, Miguel Angel De Corral Martin, Naoll Cyrille 
Mary, Naomi Halewood, Natasha Sharma, Paolo Spagnoletto, Parshwanath Adiraja, 
Patricia Mwangi, Patrick Thaddayos Balla, Paul Baringanire, Roberta Malee Bassett, 
Sonia Plaza, Stella Ilieva, Susan Apudo Owuor, Tania Ghossein, Verena Phipps, Taneem 
Ahad, Anna Zita Metz, Hannah Elyzabeth Blyth, Isaac Njoro Thendiu, Miles McKenna, 
Mona Darweesh, Mwombeki Baregu, Shamis Salah Musingo, Simbi Wavinya Anzaya, 
Abdirashid Mohamed Abdi, Laura Anne Watson, Ahmad Shah Durrani, and James 
Albert Knuckles.
The team is also grateful to the peer reviewers who provided valuable input: Volker 
Treichel, Natalia Agapitova, Sitora Sultanova, and Mohamud Yasin Jama.
Finally, the team would also like to thank numerous World Bank colleagues, private 
sector representatives, and development partners who generously shared their time and 
insight in preparation of this CPSD.
=== PAGE 6 ===
|  II  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
ACLED 	
Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project
AML/CFT 	
anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of terrorism
ATMIS	
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
BDS	
business development services
BMO	
business member organization
CBR 	
correspondent banking relationship
CBS	
Central Bank of Somalia
ESO	
entrepreneurship support organization
ESPs	
energy service providers
FAO	
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FCV	
fragility, conflict, and violence
FDI	
foreign direct investment
FGS	
Federal Government of Somalia (exception to rule not to 
abbreviation government names)
FI	
financial institution
FMS	
federal member states
FRC	
Financial Reporting Center
FSI	
financial system initiative
GER	
gross enrollment ratio
HIPC	
heavily indebted poor countries
HSDG	
high-speed diesel generator
ID	
identification
IDP	
internally displaced person
IIPA	
Investor and Investments Protection Act 
IPP	
investment policy and promotion
kWh	
kilowatt-hour 
KYC	
know your customer
KYC/CDD 	
know your customer/customer due diligence 
MENAFATF 	
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force
MFI	
microfinance institution
MMO	
mobile money operator
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
=== PAGE 7 ===
|  III  |
MoCI	
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
MoEWR 	
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources 
MSME	
micro, small, and medium enterprise
MTB	
money transfer business
NCA	
National Communications Authority
NGO	
nongovernmental organization
NIRA	
National Identification and Registration Authority 
NPS	
national payment system
ODA	
official development assistance
PPD	
public-private dialogue
PPP	
public-private partnership
PV	
photovoltaic 
RRA	
Risk and Resilience Assessment (World Bank)
SHFS	
Somali High Frequency Survey (World Bank)
SHS	
solar home system
SIHBS	
Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey
SoBS	
Somalia Bureau of Standards 
SOMINVEST 	
Somali Investment Promotion Office
SOS 	
Somalia shilling
SPS	
Somalia Payment Switch
TVET	
technical and vocational education and training
=== PAGE 8 ===
|  IV  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Country Private Sector Diagnostic (CPSD) was conducted at a challenging but 
promising juncture in Somalia’s development journey. Since 2012, the country has 
made sustained political and institutional progress, which has enabled a path of 
reconstruction and a certain regularization of political processes after many decades 
of state collapse. However, it is unlikely that these developments will take root unless 
more inclusive dividends can be generated for the Somali population, in a context 
of insufficient economic opportunities and extreme levels of vulnerability. Because 
the Federal Government of Somalia’s (FGS’s) fiscal space and institutional capacity 
to deliver public goods and services are limited, marshaling the private sector for 
development outcomes is crucial. Thus, there is an urgent need for a diagnostic that 
explores the most viable path toward the type of broad-based private sector–led growth 
that would help Somalia move away from its current predicament. To this end, and 
in line with the established World Bank CPSD methodology, this report provides an 
impartial assessment of the state of the private sector, analyzes cross-cutting and sectoral 
constraints to private sector development, recommends policies and reforms to mitigate 
these constraints, and identifies opportunities for increased private sector engagement in 
the country. 
The analysis and recommendations of the CPSD will inform Somalia’s reform agenda 
despite the scarcity of information in the country. Somalia is highly data deprived, and 
knowledge of how Somali economic life is organized remains limited, given the scarcity 
of trustworthy countrywide statistics.1 However, through expert and key informant 
interviews, a secondary literature review, and qualitative data collection, it is possible 
to make some directional conclusions about the state of the Somali private sector 
and present a policy agenda that could help catalyze inclusive private sector growth 
and the creation of more and better jobs for Somalia’s rapidly growing population. 
By assessing critical constraints to the private sector and identifying the policies and 
regulatory reforms needed to unleash private investments with strong development 
impact, the CPSD lays the foundation for an integrated response that includes both 
private and public sector perspectives, expertise, and solutions. Thus, the CPSD will 
inform the World Bank country engagement process in Somalia, with its insights and 
recommendations aligned with and integrated into World Bank strategic documents 
like the Risk and Resilience Assessment and the Country Partnership Framework. The 
CPSD can also be leveraged to inform the Somali government’s broader reform agenda, 
such as the National Development Plans, and facilitate the engagement of various 
stakeholders in the process.
=== PAGE 9 ===
|  V  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Country Context
Somalia is in a nascent transition from fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV). Following 
the collapse of the Somali government in 1991, Somalia entered into a long period of 
complete state collapse. The establishment of the FGS and the subsequent creation of 
new Federal Member States (FMS) in 2012 enabled a certain regularization of political 
processes and an extraordinary reform momentum. Substantial progress in the building 
of institutions and regulatory frameworks, the strengthening of core government 
systems and capacity, and the improvement of public financial management and 
intergovernmental fiscal relations, among other areas, has been made in Somalia. The 
country also reached the heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) Completion Point in 
December 2023, after which Somalia is expected to receive debt relief and move toward 
fully normalizing its relations with its main creditors. 
However, a diverse set of structural and overlapping challenges linked to Somalia’s 
historical legacy is limiting FGS’s state-building progress.2 While the root causes of 
FCV in Somalia are complex and multifaceted, the country faces the following three 
key mutually reinforcing drivers of fragility: (a) continued intrastate instability and elite 
contestation, (b) fractured relations between the state and citizens, and (c) deep-seated 
intercommunal divisions. Moreover, Somalia's FCV context is characterized by a 
complex set of hybrid governance arrangements3 and non-state actors that emerged in 
the wake of the collapse of the state, including the violent extremist group Al-Shabaab. 
Therefore, despite recent progress, Somalia continues to be ranked as the most fragile 
state in the world.4 Extreme levels of vulnerability that both result from and aggravate 
the country’s level of fragility also continue to plague Somalia, with high levels of 
insecurity and conflict and an elevated susceptibility to climatic shocks, exacerbating 
famine conditions, forced displacement, poverty, and lack of human development. 
The Somali economy has been robust and possesses considerable potential despite the 
country’s political issues, but it is not generating enough quality opportunities to foster 
a transition from fragility. Somalia has ample economic potential. It could become 
an economic integrator and a gateway to international markets, and it also boasts 
abundant resources, including hydrocarbons, minerals, renewable energy, livestock, 
and fisheries. Since 2012, when FGS was established, the country has experienced more 
growth than Sub-Saharan Africa and FCV-affected countries on average.5 Welfare has 
also improved modestly in recent decades. However, this economic growth has been 
insufficient for Somalia’s expanding population, and reportedly in 2022 merely 21.7 
percent of adult Somalis were employed.6 Somali women are particularly disadvantaged, 
with gender gaps in employment and labor force participation rates of around 21 
and 23 percent, respectively.7 Furthermore, the jobs that are generated are mostly 
unproductive and do not provide a meaningful income and pathway out of poverty, 
while the permanence of the jobs that do exist is precarious, since economic growth is 
consumption driven and largely underpinned by external financial flows. Therefore, 
Somalia’s high fertility and urbanization rates have become contributors of fragility 
instead of incentivizing growth.
=== PAGE 10 ===
|  VI  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
State of the Private Sector
The Somali private sector has been the economic foundation of the country in recent 
decades. In a country with no state-owned enterprises and a government expenditure 
that still accounts for a negligible proportion of gross domestic product (GDP),8 the 
private sector accounts for an estimated 95 percent of total jobs created.9 Furthermore, 
private businesses are the primary provider of almost all of the limited range of 
products and services on offer in Somalia. This includes not only commercial goods 
and services, but also services that traditionally should be delivered by the state,10 
including a wide range of social services and public goods (such as energy, information 
and communication technology [ICT] connectivity, and water).11 Many private sector 
firms also funnel substantial amounts of capital to the public sphere through corporate 
social responsibility programs, which are sometimes a result of the direct request of clan 
elders12 and are earmarked for a range of humanitarian issues and public goods.13 
However, Somalia’s productive tradable sectors remain subdued and fail to provide 
a basis for structural transformation. With most of Somalia’s productive assets, 
infrastructure, and investment capital diminishing during and after the collapse of Siyad 
Barre’s regime, the country has a very low economic complexity. Its manufacturing 
sector currently represents only 15 percent of established businesses (which generate 
merely about 0.8 percent of total jobs in Somalia)14 and about 2.4 percent of household 
businesses (accounting for less than 1 percent of total jobs).15 The manufacturing 
sector’s productivity levels are also lower than those of virtually all other economic 
sectors. It is primarily low-value-added livestock, fishery, and crop goods that account 
for most of the country’s productive activity. Yet despite their prevalence, these sectors 
have suffered a considerable deterioration in recent decades, currently accounting for 
only 26 percent of employment.16 They are also underdeveloped and heavily affected by 
frequent climatic shocks. For instance, despite the potential of fisheries in Somalia, given 
the country’s long coastline and a marine ecosystem that is highly productive because 
of seasonal upwelling, the contribution of the sector to the economy remains modest. 
Finally, these productive sectors are characterized by substantial gender disparities, 
as women carry out the bulk of labor and business activity but remain limited to 
subsistence-level production because of constraints in access to markets and networks.17
Consequently, private sector activity is concentrated in commerce and other, mostly 
nontradable, consumption-driven services. The extent to which Somali markets are 
underserved in terms of both volume and range of products18 continues to generate a 
cornucopia of highly profitable opportunities for importing goods.19 With a few notable 
exceptions (for instance, livestock), Somalia depends on imports for most products, 
including basic commodities (such as food and fuel). Private sector activity across the 
country is thus concentrated on commerce and other mostly nontradable services. In 
rural areas, 69 percent of employment is in retail, petty trading, and other nontradable 
services.20 In urban areas, retail trade, wholesale trade, and other nontradable services 
are estimated to account for more than 90 percent of jobs.21
=== PAGE 11 ===
|  VII  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Benefits of this consumption-driven growth are captured by a small number of 
firms that leverage their positions to distort and capture markets. Much of the 
country’s wealth is accumulated by a few large conglomerates that are often formally 
incorporated outside Somali territory but operate almost solely in Somalia across 
sectors such as finance, ICT, transportation, tourism, energy, real estate, and commerce. 
Conglomerates have also attained wide-ranging influence with the Somali population,22 
regional clan stakeholders, and government institutions,23 which they routinely leverage 
to protect and advance their interests. A few other large companies and a number of 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) operate successfully in a range of sectors which 
conglomerates have not fully captured,24 achieving a high level of profitability25 and 
productivity that is in line with benchmarks in comparator countries.26 However, to 
achieve this success, being an insider both socially and politically remains important.
Most firms in the country remain highly disadvantaged,27 leading to a missing middle 
and lower overall productivity and job generation. Firms that lack social and political 
networks endure a more burdensome business environment.28 This is particularly 
common for women-owned businesses, which are generally excluded from existing 
political and clan-based networks because of the patriarchal structure of Somali 
society.29 Formal SMEs also often face a higher tax burden30 and an inability to 
scale up their operations.31 Businesses in Somalia are thus usually small, with SMEs 
accounting for only 6 percent of established businesses (or around 2.4 percent of total 
employment)32 and almost 94 percent of nonagricultural firms in Mogadishu and 
Bosaso—of which a majority are necessity driven—being micro.33 Most Somali firms are 
also informal, and the percentage of informal jobs in Somalia is estimated to be above 
91 percent.34 This state of affairs impacts job generation and overall productivity of the 
Somali private sector, as informal and necessity-driven ventures underperform in both 
categories.35 
Additionally, low economic integration and a minimal complexity of foreign direct 
investment (FDI) weigh on the productivity growth prospects of the Somali private 
sector. With limited foreign value added in its exports and little participation as 
intermediate inputs to other countries’ exports, Somalia’s products’ backward and 
forward linkages to global value chains are limited,36 given the significant degree of 
geographic and economic fragmentation characteristic of Somalia’s private sector.37 
Furthermore, while FDI in Somalia appears to be sizable as a proportion of GDP, with 
the FDI stock estimated to have increased substantially in recent years, it remains very 
small on a per capita basis. The share of FDI that is efficiency seeking is also low, as FDI 
is driven primarily by diaspora investments, which are funneled into low-impact sectors 
(such as shops, cafes, and land) and Somali transnational conglomerate investments, 
which contribute to market inefficiencies.38
=== PAGE 12 ===
|  VIII  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Cross-Cutting Policy Constraints 
While several foundational steps have been taken to develop formal institutional 
and regulatory frameworks for the private sector, these measures are still incomplete 
and thus only partially effective. Progress has been made in the development of the 
regulatory and institutional frameworks for business entry and exit (including the major 
milestone of approving the new Company Act in 2019), financial sector strengthening, 
investment policy and promotion, public-private partnerships, trade, quality standards 
and infrastructure, tax regulation, and trusted identity verification. These steps have 
been foundational for Somalia, as they represent the critical building blocks for 
improving the business environment in the country. However, there are many areas 
where regulatory and institutional frameworks for the private sector remain nascent or 
lacking (such as in monopoly control). Despite various levels of progress made, there 
are also a series of gaps in the laws and regulations that have been developed, a range 
of capacity gaps in institutions for private sector development, and complexities on FGS 
and regional government mandates regarding the private sector. 
The Somali private sector continues to rely heavily on trust-based informal institutions, 
which have been a source of resilience but also tend to reproduce socioeconomic 
inequalities. Since the 1980s, trust-based parallel informal institutions have been central 
to Somali business relations. Some are linked to clans and Xeer customary law,39 while 
others are self-sustaining nonclan trust-based informal institutions that have been 
essential to the functioning of the Somali private sector. However, Somali informal 
institutions have a wide range of issues that reproduce socioeconomic inequalities 
and make relying on these institutions for inclusive private sector development 
unsustainable.40 First, the weakness of formal institutions such as legal contracts 
increases risks, uncertainty, and fraudulence. Second, informal institutions in Somalia 
are mostly inequitable, given structural advantages for stakeholders that are politically, 
economically, and militarily stronger, and the relative weakness of other stakeholders 
like women.41 However, attempted regulatory and institutional reforms to transition to 
more formal institutions often provoke considerable resistance from vested interests.42 
Corruption and the prevalence of competing alternative governance arrangements  
also affect the efficiency of existing formal institutional and regulatory frameworks. 
 Despite considerable efforts by FGS to increase transparency across multiple 
dimensions—including fiscal and financial sector governance, anticorruption, and  
anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)—the 
Somali government remains ranked as one of the countries most affected by corruption, 
as evidenced by third-party corruption indicators, including Transparency International's 
Corruption Perception Index, Verisk Maplecroft's Corruption Index, and the Worldwide 
Governance Indicator's control of corruption indicator.43 Corruption is also reported 
to be a major issue for private sector stakeholders,44 as it affects the implementation 
of existing formal institutional and regulatory frameworks, enabling land grabbing by 
powerful groups as well as instances of bribery and fraud in public procurement and in 
legal proceedings. The prevalence of competing alternative governance arrangements in 
The CPSD highlights five key cross-cutting policy constraints for private sector 
development in Somalia: (a) deficient formal institutional, legal, and regulatory 
frameworks; (b) resulting prevalence of informal institutions; (c) enduring 
impacts of corruption; (d) competing alternative governance arrangements; and 
(e) the lack of an effective and inclusive national public-private dialogue (PPD) 
mechanism to ensure more effective, inclusive, and efficient reform processes.
=== PAGE 13 ===
|  IX  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Somalia also makes the business environment more complicated for private sector firms. 
The unfinished political settlement between FGS and FMS, and coercion by Al-Shabaab 
lead to multiple levels of taxes and fees and an increase in the private sector’s tax 
burden. Finally, private sector entities suffer from legal pluralism, since a range of state, 
customary, and religious norms coproduce governance.45
A consensus is emerging to establish an inclusive national PPD mechanism to enable 
more efficient and effective institutional and regulatory reform processes. However, 
inclusive sustainable national dialogue has not been achieved, and the lack of trust 
between different stakeholders remains a considerable issue. While some large private 
sector players have entrenched vested interests in maintaining the status quo, they 
seem to increasingly understand that reform is necessary to resolve the complex and 
fluid current business environment and to enable a more inclusive economic growth 
that would in turn expand demand for their businesses.46 In this context, many steps 
have already been taken to develop PPD in Somalia. With support from development 
partners, the government has engaged with the private sector since the first PPD was 
launched in 2016. However, inclusive sustainable national dialogue has not been 
achieved, and the lack of trust between different stakeholders remains a considerable 
issue. Development of efficient and inclusive PPD mechanisms to achieve greater trust 
and accelerate sustainable reform progress in Somalia is therefore essential. 
Bottlenecks in Enabling Sectors 
Efficient and accessible delivery of public goods and enabling services47 is critical to enable 
private sector development and economic transformation. In Somalia, enabling sectors 
were largely destroyed during and after the civil war.48 While the private sector has stepped 
in during recent decades to provide many of these enabling services, firms avoid investing 
in nonexcludable products and infrastructure. Since the FGS’ financial and technical 
capacity is constrained, which limits its ability to effectively steward nonstate institutions, 
the delivery of public goods and enabling services often remains inefficient, insufficient, 
and inequitable.
Energy Sector
Access to reliable, predictable, safe, and affordable electricity is low and inequitable in 
Somalia. While a reliable baseline for electricity access in the country is still unavailable, 
diverse data sources consistently suggest that a large proportion of the Somali population 
lacks access to electricity. When available, electricity in the country often also tends to 
be unreliable, unpredictable, unsafe, and unaffordable. Delivery and servicing for large 
customer loads are largely unsuccessful because of limits to the amount of electricity that 
can be delivered to consumers by each supplier.49 Furthermore, shortages are extremely 
common,50 and security issues related to electricity infrastructure are frequent. Somalia 
ranks in the upper 5 percent globally for power cost and in the upper 15 percent globally 
for power expenditure as a share of gross national income per household.51 
The CPSD highlights energy, financial services, transport, digital connectivity, 
water, education, and business services as key enabling sectors for Somalia and 
discusses some access, availability, and performance issues in these sectors. Two 
of these sectors—financial services and energy—are discussed in sector deep 
dives because of their potential to provide near- to medium-term opportunities 
for the private sector.
=== PAGE 14 ===
|  X  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Both on-grid and off-grid electricity sectors are facing significant challenges. Somalia 
lacks a centralized grid, with private sector energy service providers (ESPs) supplying 
most of the country’s electricity. The Somali on-grid electricity sector consists of a 
fragmented patchwork of small, isolated diesel-based minigrids, run by private sector 
operators almost solely in urban and peri-urban areas, and is beset with intertwined 
challenges of ad hoc service provision. The installed capacity and distribution 
penetration of ESPs are insufficient and unevenly distributed. The generation mix 
of ESPs and their lack of interconnection also result in an inefficient and expensive 
electricity supply. Meanwhile, although the off-grid electricity sector has developed 
substantially in recent years, it remains composed of short supply chains with weak 
downstream markets.
The energy sector in Somalia presents numerous untapped opportunities. In the near to 
medium term, these opportunities lie primarily in minigrid and stand-alone solutions.52 
More specifically, (a) the interconnection of current ESP distribution networks and 
generation infrastructure has the potential to accomplish considerable improvements 
in network reliability and operational efficiency and (b) the untapped market for 
renewable solutions is considerable (including the hybridization of generations networks 
with batteries and scaling of PayGo plans). However, a number of bottlenecks that 
introduce uncertainty and inhibit investments need to be addressed. While Somalia has 
made enormous strides in recent years toward improving the enabling environment 
for the electricity sector, a de facto institutional and regulatory vacuum continues to 
characterize it. Thus, distortions in electricity markets continue to be common in a 
context characterized by regional monopolies. 
Financial Sector
Despite significant progress over recent years, access to a broad range of financial 
services also remains limited for a significant proportion of the population in Somalia. 
Somalia’s financial inclusion fares well in comparison with that of other Sub-Saharan 
African countries because of a considerable recent proliferation of mobile money 
accounts. However, the overall penetration rate of banking services is low, estimated at 
between 10 and 15 percent of the adult population.53 Furthermore, a significant portion 
of the population that operates solely in the Somali shilling economy is excluded from 
the formal financial system. Thus, access to finance for micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) and productive sectors remains a key challenge, with a large unmet 
market demand for financing in the real economy. Finally, while sex-disaggregated 
statistics on access to financial services in Somalia are not available, evidence from 
recent surveys and qualitative studies suggests that women are less likely than men to 
rely on credit as a source of business finance, with women-led enterprises being more 
likely to cite access to finance as a constraint and less likely to apply and be approved 
for loans from financial institutions.
Market-based financial intermediation in the country continues to be a challenge. 
Somalia is missing core financial infrastructure and institutions (for example, a credit 
bureau and a movable collateral registry). It also suffers from isolation from the global 
financial system and from the widespread informality that persists in the private sector. 
Such underdevelopment affects some population groups more than others, excluding 
them from the financial sector. For instance, lack of a movable collateral registry has 
a disproportionate impact on the female market segment. Additionally, the financial 
soundness of the banking system is difficult to measure because of limited data. The 
financial sector's institutional and regulatory frameworks have been substantially 
strengthened over recent years; however, additional efforts are needed to fill in the 
remaining gaps. The financial sector also continues to be concentrated in a few institutions, 
with five banks accounting for nearly 90 percent of the industry’s assets, deposits, and 
loans, and nonbanking financial institutions remain small and largely unregulated.
=== PAGE 15 ===
|  XI  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
However, the Somali financial sector has come a long way, growing significantly in 
recent years. Between 2018 and 2023, total assets and customer deposits at commercial 
banks more than quadrupled from US$415 million to US$1,795 million and from 
US$332 million to US$1,431 million, respectively,54 and credit to the private sector 
more than doubled from US$161 million to US$404 million.55 The Central Bank 
of Somalia has also slowly but gradually strengthened the legal framework for the 
financial sector, and regulatory capacity building for the institution is ongoing. The 
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF) mutual 
evaluation planned for mid-2024 will be an important milestone for Somalia’s financial 
sector, while initiatives are underway to address AML/CFT risks (including the rollout 
of the national identification system) and facilitate Somalia’s integration into the global 
financial system.
The financial sector offers promising short- to medium-term private sector opportunities. 
First, leveraging high levels of telecommunications and smartphone access offers 
opportunities for business development in digital financial services (such as development 
of merchant payments and credit products). Second, with a predominantly import-
oriented economy and a growing need for efficient international trade transactions, 
there is a burgeoning demand for trade finance services in Somalia. Third, there is 
a growing need for microcredit in Somalia, and this trend is expected to continue. 
However, to unlock these investment opportunities, targeted policies and reforms to 
address the aforementioned constraints from the supply and demand side are required. 
It will also remain essential for investors to navigate the unique challenges presented 
by the Somali financial sector, including security concerns and regulatory complexities, 
while conducting thorough due diligence to ensure the success and sustainability of such 
investments.
Other Enabling Sectors
Somalia is also afflicted by elevated road transport prices and high port and airport 
fees, among other constraints to long-haul transport. The country’s 2023 ranking in 
the World Bank’s Logistics Performance index is 138th of 140, as a result of Somalia's 
underperformance across multiple indicators, including quality of trade and transport-
related infrastructure. The aviation sector, while serving as a key gateway to the 
country and within it, remains underdeveloped, with a ratio of passenger movement to 
urban population and total volumes of cargo that are minimal compared to regional 
benchmarks.56 While there is little information about Somali maritime port facilities, 
existing assessments suggest that their performance is subpar, with slow handling 
times, limited traffic volumes and port occupancy, and high costs, among other issues. 
Finally, the infrastructure of Somalia’s roads, which are the country’s principal mode 
of transport, is characterized by low road density and poor conditions. Consequently, 
road connectivity between major cities is inadequate and costly,57 and travel times 
are quite long (for example, it can take five days to travel 1,400 kilometers from 
Mogadishu to Bosaso).58 This situation is aggravated further by the nascent state of 
public institutions in the transport sector59 and by a political economy in the logistics 
sector which has led to de facto self-regulation60 and very limited competition.61
=== PAGE 16 ===
|  XII  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Good progress has been made to improve digital connectivity, but a number of gaps 
still remain to be addressed. The country’s adoption of mobile communications has 
increased significantly in recent decades. Mobile network services have also become 
substantially more affordable, enabling low-income Somalis to communicate more 
easily.62 These developments have had a series of positive spillovers to the country’s 
economy (for instance, mobile money services have become the dominant retail payment 
instrument in Somalia)63 and have played an important role in assisting individuals in 
rural areas, where poverty is more prevalent. However, broadband penetration and use 
of bandwidth remain low in comparison with those of regional peers. This is partly 
because of large gaps in middle- and last-mile network infrastructure that result from 
a fragmented regional backbone and because the ICT market is fully captured by de 
facto monopolies that lean toward vertical market integration across sites64 and control 
subregional markets. The ICT sector’s underdeveloped institutional and regulatory 
frameworks also hamper its development. Furthermore, demand issues constrain the 
growth of digital connectivity in the country. Apart from the limited purchasing power 
of the Somali population and the high cost of smart broadband-compatible devices, 
Somalia continues to lack a series of building blocks (such as digital literacy) that are 
necessary for digital development.
Economic activities that require reliable access to high-quality water have been 
progressively constrained in recent decades. In 2022, only around 75 percent of 
households had access to improved water sources, with an even smaller proportion 
of the population having access to safely managed drinking water. In 2018–19, an 
estimated 43 percent of established urban firms65 and a large proportion of rural firms66 
also experienced water insufficiencies, with a gender dimension to water scarcity.67 
Furthermore, there are sizable concerns over quality of water in the country. The 
primary driver of these issues is poor water management. Water infrastructure has been 
largely destroyed. Furthermore, while the water sector in Somalia has a comprehensive 
multigovernance framework in theory, its institutional and regulatory frameworks often 
remain fragmented and ineffective. The loose regulation of nonstate water delivery 
stakeholders contributes to poor water access in Somalia. Community-led water service 
delivery in rural regions is often inefficient and inequitable, with water committee 
leaders colluding and engaging in rent-seeking behavior and operating water points with 
limited technical capacity. The lack of regulation for private water markets also leads 
to exorbitant water prices and a lack of standards for the construction and operation of 
water resources in urban settings.
A lack of relevant skills hampers private sector development. Unemployed Somalis cite 
inadequate skills as one of the main barriers to finding a job, jobs that demand vocational 
skills are often left unoccupied,68 and many firms have to draw on foreign workers to 
remain competitive.69 This is unsurprising given the low formal education outcomes in 
Somalia.70 Education of women is particularly constrained in the country, with gender 
gaps linked to demand- and supply-side factors such as social pressures for early marriage, 
expectations that girls support households and caregiving, and a shortage of female 
teachers. Furthermore, there is a clear mismatch between the skills possessed by Somali 
workers and those needed by employers, because of weaknesses in the technical and 
vocational education and training and nonformal education sectors, and labor market 
frictions often caused by societal preferences and norms depress labor market dynamics 
and affect job transitions. Gender segregation into traditionally male and female fields 
and strong cultural associations between traditional clans and specific professions also 
affect the jobs market,71 with societal norms perpetuating gender imbalances in training 
programs and the workforce and inhibiting the full utilization of the existing talent and 
skills in the country.
=== PAGE 17 ===
|  XIII  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Considerable opportunities exist for improved BDS and entrepreneurship support, 
given the nascent development of both type of services in Somalia A large proportion 
of unemployed Somalis indicates that they need training and financing to start a 
business.72 Established firms of all types also seem to have a significant need for 
business development services (BDS). However, the nascent entrepreneurship support 
ecosystem in Somalia is still underdeveloped, comprising organizations with very little 
specialization and poor sustainability.73 Access to professional services and the supply 
of training and technical business support also remain limited, making it challenging 
for firms to improve business administration functions, engage in and enforce contracts, 
and access data and market information.74 In effect, most of the BDS providers have 
significant capacity gaps, provide their services through informal personal networks, 
and lack a track record of creating value for clients,75 leading to a minimal demand for 
these services.76 
Recommendations
In light of Somalia’s FCV context, initiatives for private sector development need to 
be carefully sequenced and designed, not only to incentivize short-term dividends, but 
also to enable an economic transformation of the country in the medium to long term. 
Structural challenges related to high levels of insecurity, governance challenges, and 
fragile state legitimacy significantly undermine the potential growth and inclusiveness 
of the private sector. Specifically, it must be acknowledged that there are limitations 
to what is possible in the short to medium term for some of the most prominent 
constraints to private sector development (for example, corruption, road checkpoints by 
armed groups, and market distortions) without addressing the root causes of FCV and 
making significant progress on the country’s broader state-building agenda. Relatedly, 
mitigating the performance issues of key enabling sectors to foster an economic 
transformation in the medium to long term should be a priority. However, the feasible 
types of interventions to resolve these performance issues without further increasing 
entrenched inequalities in a post-HIPC environment are limited by the government’s 
fragility, weak institutional capacity, limited fiscal space, and a likely reduction of its 
access to concessional financing. Meanwhile, it is unlikely that the country’s reform 
momentum will take root unless short-term inclusive dividends can be generated for its 
growing population. Certain steps to enable private sector–led development thus need 
to be taken immediately. This is in line with the experience from other FCV-affected 
contexts, which suggests that initiatives to develop the private sector need to begin early 
in the relief-to-development continuum to avoid backsliding.77 
Recognizing the fragile situation and structural constraints in the country, the Somalia 
CPSD proposes the following three mutually reinforcing recommendations:
•	 Establish legitimate, effective, and equitable formal institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for private sector–led growth.
•	 Promote private participation and improve public stewardship of key enabling 
sectors to facilitate an economic transformation in the medium to long term.
•	 Improve growth and productivity of selected value chains for short- to medium-term 
dividends.
=== PAGE 18 ===
|  XIV  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
These three recommendations reinforce each other when implemented in parallel, 
and priority actions under each are presented in table ES.1. Importantly, in line with 
the country’s ongoing state-building agenda, several of the recommendations require 
cooperation among different levels of government—including the FGS, FMS, and more 
local levels—for effective implementation, for example, in building consensus around 
key reforms and developing harmonized systems and standards. 
At the project level, investors and companies that consider working in Somalia are 
encouraged to use tools such as conflict sensitivity guidance78 in their operations to 
manage some of the nonfinancial risks that are a reality of doing business in the country. 
Detailed recommendations are further discussed in chapter 7, including specific priority 
interventions for each of the enabling sectors.
TABLE ES.1 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SOMALIA’S PRIVATE SECTOR 
Priority Recommendationsa
Rationale
1.  Establish legitimate, effective, and equitable formal 
institutional and regulatory frameworks.
•  Develop an institutionalized inclusive national PPD structure.
•  Implement a unified and harmonized business registration 
and licensing system.
•  Streamline and harmonize trade processes (for instance, 
implementation of electronic cargo-tracking and single-
window systems).
•  Take steps to better align the country’s investment policy 
and promotion and PPP frameworks with best practices.
•  Carry out a detailed assessment of property rights and land 
tenure.
•  Harmonize the country’s tax and customs regime.
•  Launch an inclusive digital identity registration process.
•  Continue capacity building at key formal institutions.
Enable an economic transformation of the country in the 
medium to long term.
•  Increase economic growth and firm productivity and enable 
effective public-private cooperation (such as in service 
delivery). 
•  Enable an increase of efficiency-seeking FDI in the medium to 
long term. 
•  Help rebuild trust and social cohesion and improve legitimacy 
of formal institutions.
=== PAGE 19 ===
|  XV  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Priority Recommendationsa
Rationale
2.  Promote private participation in and improve public 
stewardship of key enabling sectors.
•  Develop an integrated national investment strategy that 
identifies and coordinates investments in various enabling 
sectors. 
•  Further develop sector-specific institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for key enabling sectors (for example, financial, 
energy, transport, water, and education) and harmonize 
these frameworks across Somalia.
•  Provide catalytic funding to facilitate enabling services 
provision in areas with weak investment incentives (such as 
for hybrid minigrids, schools, and water provision).
•  Take steps to facilitate the development of PPPs in various 
key enabling sectors (for example, transport and education).
•  Strengthen financial infrastructure (for instance, payment 
switch, national collateral registry, and credit information 
system).
•  Deploy risk-sharing mechanisms to promote financial 
inclusion.
•  Incentivize operational efficiency and quality improvements 
of BDS providers.
•  Improve effectiveness of development partner-funded 
activities to improve service delivery.
•  Better leverage private sector arrangements to address 
enabling sector shortfalls and gaps.
•  Enable diversification to higher-value-added activities. 
•  Enable priority economic activities along selected economic 
corridors.
3.  Improve growth and productivity of selected value 
chains (for example, livestock, crops, and fisheries). 
•  Enhance collection of data on selected economic sectors. 
•  Support the development of extension services and the 
transfer of technology in selected value chains.
•  Support technical assistance or BDS for established MSMEs 
and upskilling of livelihood and need-based ventures in 
selected value chains (with a climate-smart and gender-
conscious focus).
•  Develop economic linkage programs between large firms 
and productive value chains.
•  Improve value chain-specific access to finance. 
•  Enhance government stewardship of selected economic 
sectors.
Deliver short- to medium-term inclusive dividends. 
•  Improve short-term economic opportunities.
•  Create inclusive jobs. 
•  Reduce poverty and improve livelihoods.
•  Enhance resilience to climate shocks.
•  Promote women’s empowerment.
a.  The three recommendations reinforce each other when implemented in parallel.
Note: 	
BDS = business development services; FDI = foreign direct investment; MSME = micro, small, and medium enterprise; 	
PPD = public-private dialogue; PPP = public-private partnership.
=== PAGE 20 ===
|  XVI  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Notes
1.	
An establishment census and a countrywide firm-level survey do not exist, and the scarce statistics that have been collected 
frequently comprise only businesses in large urban cities. Data trustworthiness can also be questionable, given the high level 
of informality, and important differences between regions can sometimes be obscured.
2.	
Somalis’ distrust of concentration of power in a central state, deep-seated intercommunal and political divisions, debates 
about identity and representation, and a persistent contestation for power and resources are a few of these issues.
3.	
The system of governance without government that arose during more than two decades of statelessness in Somalia draws 
on a combination of customary authority, sharia courts, and business leaders, among other nonstate actors. 
4.	
Fragile States Index, 2023, https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/. 
5.	
World Development Indicators, 2021.
6.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” live streamed February 
20, 2023.
7.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS”; and UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund), “Economic Characteristics 
of the Somalia People” (UNFPA, New York, 2016).
8.	
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 2022 Article IV consultation. According to the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) Country Report No. 23/438 (December 2023), government expenditure was only 6.9 percent of GDP in 2021 in 
Somalia, compared to a Sub-Saharan Africa average of 22.1 percent of GDP.
9.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
10.	
Security and social services are often privatized in countries where government institutions are absent. For further discussion 
on this, see Alexander de Waal, Famine Crimes: Politics and the Disaster Relief Industry in Africa (Oxford: African Rights & the 
International African Institute, in association with James Currey, 1997). 
11.	
Stakeholder consultations, January 2023, and various secondary sources (for example, J. Meester, A. Uzelac, and C. Elder, 
Transnational Capital in Somalia: Blue Desert Strategy [The Hague, Netherlands: Clingendael Institute, 2019]; and Tobias 
Hagmann et al., Commodified Cities: Urbanization and Public Goods in Somalia [Rift Valley Institute, Nairobi, Kenya, 2020]).
12.	
 Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, Transnational Capital in Somalia. 
13.	
For more information on this topic, see Sherine El Taraboulsi-McCarthy, Nisar Majid, and Barnaby Willitts-King, “Private 
Sector Engagement in Complex Emergencies: Case Studies from Yemen and Southern Somalia”(HPG Report, Humanitarian 
Policy Group, London, 2017); and Yusuf Nur, “The Business-Government Partnership Way to Economic Development in 
Somalia,” in Theorising Somali Society: Hope, Transformation and Development, ed. Abdulkadir Osman Farah and Mohamed Eno 
(New Delhi, India: Authorspress, 2022).
14.	
Estimate using World Bank staff calculations on the contribution of different types of businesses to employment from the 
2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
15.	
According to the 2022 Somalia Household Survey, 2.4 percent of household businesses processed purchased crops or 
livestock products for sale. The proportion of total employment was estimated by using World Bank staff calculations 
of the contributions of different types of businesses to employment from the 2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic 
Memorandum, and assuming that household businesses of different types have similar average numbers of employees.
16.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
17.	
World Bank and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture 
in Somalia, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, volume 1 (Washington, DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development/World Bank and FAO, 2018), https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/781281522164647812/pdf/124651-
REVISED-Somalia-CEM-Agriculture-Report-Main-Report-Revised-July-2018.pdf; and FAO, “National Gender Profile of 
Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods: Somalia,” (report, FAO, Mogadishu, Somalia, 2021), https://www.fao.org/3/cb6316en/
cb6316en.pdf. 
18.	
 J. Meester, J. Claes, C. Elder, and G. Lanfranchi, “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets: A Political-Economic Perspective on 
SMEs in the Somali Private Sector under COVID-19,” Clingendael Institute, clingendael.org, May 17, 2021.
19.	
Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets.” 
20.	
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
21.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
22.	
Shabelle Media Network, “Somalia: Hormud Telecom’s Response to Bombing Victims Draws Praise,” allAfrica, October 21, 2017, 
https://allafrica.com/stories/201710230675.html.
23.	
For instance, see “How Somaliland Parliament Became a Wholly Owned Subsidiary of Dahabshiil,” Somaliland Chronicle, 
August 19, 2018, accessed February 7, 2023, https://somalilandchronicle.com/2018/08/19/how-somaliland-parliament-
became-a-wholly-owned-subsidiary-of-dahabshiil/ (accessed 7 February 2023).
=== PAGE 21 ===
|  XVII  |
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
24.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, Transnational Capital in Somalia. 
25.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, Somalia, and Nairobi, Kenya, January 2023; and consultations 
with private sector stakeholders in Hargeisa, Somaliland, November 2022.
26.	
See results of latest Enterprise Surveys for Mozambique and Zambia.
27.	
Consultations with stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and in Hargeisa, November 2022.
28.	
Consultations with stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and in Hargeisa, November 2022.
29.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
30.	
Sagal Abshir, Khalif Abdirahman, and Hannah Stogdon, “Tax and the State in Somalia” (Briefing Paper, Rift Valley Institute, 
London and Nairobi, Kenya, May 2020); and “Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea pursuant to Security 
Council Resolution 2244 (2015): Somalia (S/2016/919)” (United Nations Security Council, New York, 2016).
31.	
Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets.”
32.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2019 Enterprise, Informal, and Micro Surveys and on the World Bank 2021 Somalia 
Country Economic Memorandum.
33.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2019 Bosaso and Mogadishu Micro-enterprises Survey Dataset.
34.	
IMF, “Informality, Development, and the Business Cycle in North Africa” (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2022).
35.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2022 HH Survey in Somalia; World Bank staff calculations based on the 2019 
Enterprise and Micro Survey in Mogadishu and Bosaso; and results from the latest Enterprise Surveys for Mozambique and 
Zambia.
36.	
Analysis by World Bank staff for 2022 trade assessment.
37.	
As discussed in a recent analysis of spatial differences in domestic prices in the 2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic 
Memorandum.
38.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, Transnational Capital in Somalia.
39.	
Xeer is an unwritten code of conduct that evolved orally over time based on interactions between various Somali clans since 
the 1800s, which is implemented usually by groups of respected elders from (Xeer Begti) and is often the first line of recourse 
for dispute management in the country.
40.	
Mahdi Abdile, “Customary Dispute Resolution in Somalia,” African Conflict and Peacebuilding Review 2, no. 1 (Spring 2012): 
87–110; and Joakim Gundel, “The Predicament of the ‘Oday’: The Role of Traditional Structures in Security, Rights, Law and 
Development in Somalia” (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2006).
41.	
Günther Schlee, “Customary Laws and the Joys of Statelessness: Idealized Traditions versus Somali Realities,” Journal of Eastern 
African Studies 7, no. 2 (2013): 258–71, https://doi.org/10.1080/17531055.2013.776276.
42.	
Scott Kleinberg, “Business-Enabling Environment and the Value Chain” (Briefing Paper, US Agency for International 
Development [USAID], Washington, DC, 2008); and C. Gunduz and D. Klein, “Conflict-Sensitive Approaches to Value Chain 
Development” (microREPORT 101, USAID, Washington, DC, 2008).
43.	
Analysis by World Bank staff for 2022 trade assessment.  As discussed in a recent analysis of spatial differences in domestic 
prices in the 2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, Transnational Capital in 
Somalia. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb6316en.  See, for instance, Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index, Verisk 
Maplecroft’s Corruption Index, the World Governance Indicators’ control of corruption indicator, Trace International’s Bribery 
Risk Index, and the African Integrity Indicators.
44.	
For instance, according to a rapid firm survey conducted by the Somali Chamber of Commerce and Industry in December 2019 
and a 2016 survey conducted by the Legacy Center for Peace and Transparency, corruption is a major issue for private sector 
stakeholders.
45.	
Ken Menkhaus, “State Failure, State-Building, and Prospects for a ’Functional Failed State’ in Somalia,” Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science 656, no. 1 (2014): 154–72. 
46.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023.
47.	
Services necessary for domestic business and entrepreneurs to operate, and for international trade and private investment to 
occur.
48.	
Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development (ICED)—DFID, “Case Studies: Delivering Inclusive Growth Through 
Infrastructure Programming in FCAS; Somalia: Building Infrastructure in a ‘Failed State,’” version 3, August 2019. 
49.	
UNICON Ltd., “Power Master Plan—Development of a Power Master Plan for Somalia Project” (Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources and the World Bank, October 2018).
=== PAGE 22 ===
|  XVIII  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
50.	
Jami Nelson Nuñez, “Powering Progress: The Potential of Renewable Energy in Somalia,” One Earth Future website, February 
2015, www.shuraako.org/publications. 
51.	
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy (RISE) (Washington, DC: World 
Bank, 2022).
52.	
An interconnected distribution network and a transmission grid might be a reality in the middle to long term, with support 
from development institutions.
53.	
World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government—Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper 
(English) (Washington, DC: World Bank, Group, 2022).
54.	
World Bank FCI Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, 2023.
55.	
World Bank FCI Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, 2023.
56.	
African Development Bank Group, Somalia: Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme (Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: 
African Development Bank, October 2016). According to the African Development Bank, Somalia’s ratio of passenger 
movement to urban population is 0.13, in comparison, for instance, to Kenya, which has a ratio of 0.81.
57.	
World Bank, Somalia Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (Project Appraisal Document, PAD 4464, September 
9, 2022).
58.	
S. E. Inros Lackner, HEFI, and Africa Enablers GmBH for the Ministry of Finance of the Federal Republic of Somalia, “Port 
Master Plan—Final Report,” December 2017; SDG 9.1.1., Rural Access Index https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/
rural-access-index-rai. 
59.	
World Bank, Somalia Horn of Africa Infrastructure Project.
60.	
Tobias Hagmann et al., Commodified Cities. 
61.	
Claire Elder, “Logistics Contracts and the Political Economy of State Failure: Evidence from Somalia,” African Affairs 121, no. 484 
(July 9, 2022): 395–417.
62.	
Y. M. Mubarak, “Mobile Networks Evolution in East-Africa: Opportunities and Challenges in Mobile Networks in Kenya and 
Somalia” (master’s thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences, 2017). 
63.	
IFC (International Finance Corporation), “Somalia—Market Assessment of Financial Services” (internal unpublished report, 
IFC, 2022). 
64.	
World Bank, “Missing Broadband Links in the Horn of Africa Region” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021). 
65.	
World Bank Group, Bosaso and Mogadishu 2019 Enterprise Surveys data set. 
66.	
World Bank, “Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project in Somaliland and Puntland” (Endline Report, World Bank, 
August 2018).
67.	
For more information on this topic, see FAO, “National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods: Somalia.” 
68.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2020).
69.	
Peter Middlebrook, Hussein Siad, and Hussein Haji Mao, “Somalia Vision for Private Sector Development Report” (Working 
Paper 5, National Economic Council of Somalia, Mogadishu, December 2019).
70.	
 For instance, the primary gross enrollment rate (GER) in Somalia ranges from 9 to 30 percent, which is considerably lower 
than the 99 percent average GER in Sub-Saharan Africa and the 96 percent average in FCV countries. The number of out-of-
school children in the country is even higher at the secondary level, with a GER that ranges from 12 to 15 percent, compared 
to 44 and 46 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa and FCV countries, respectively.
71.	
World Bank, “Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills ‘Rajo Kaaba’ Project” (PAD4863, World Bank, 
Washington, DC, June 3, 2022).
72.	
Karamba, Improving Access. 
73.	
Data collection by United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in 2022. 
74.	
Grant Thornton LLP, “Identifying the Demand for Business Development Services by MSMEs in Somalia” (advisory for 
Gargaara Company Limited, Grant Thornton, Chicago, IL, 2023). 
75.	
Joy Muballe and Felix Mwangi, KfW, Somalia Business Development, and Banking Advisory Services Market Study, December 2022. 
76.	
Grant Thornton LLP, “Identifying the Demand for Business Development Services.”
77.	
Nora Dudwick and Radhika Srinivasan, Creating Jobs in Africa’s Fragile States: Are Value Chains an Answer? (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2013); Simon White, “Business Environment Reforms in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations” (Discussion 
paper, Donor Committee for Enterprise Development, Cambridge, UK, 2020); and World Bank, Providing Essential Infrastructure 
in Fragility, Conflict and Violence-Affected States: A Toolkit for Enabling SME Participation (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017), 
https://www.procurementinet.org/wp-content/themes/inet/img/presentation/document/reports/2016/SME%20PPP%20
Toolkit%20-Dec%2020%202017.pdf. 
78.	
Development finance institutions tools for the private sector such as the conflict sensitivity guidance by the Africa Resilience 
Investment Accelerator can provide an approach for identifying, managing, and monitoring risks in FCV environments 
such as Somalia. See https://static1.squarespace.com/static/61af528eb14c603aa79149d2/t/645a08a13d00766e092893
c1/1683622058346/ARIA+Conflict+Tipsheet_01_03_23_FINAL.pdf.
=== PAGE 23 ===
|  1  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
1.
1.1	
FRAGILITY AND CONFLICT DYNAMICS
Somalia is in a state of protracted fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) that has 
hindered state building and undermined development outcomes for the population. 
Several structural factors, including historical legacies related to state formation and 
collapse, contribute to contemporary FCV dynamics in Somalia. The Somali state has 
been weak since its independence in the 1960s.1 General Mohamed Siyad Barre’s regime 
initially promised transformational development upon seizing power in 1969, but that 
promise remained unfulfilled with a shrinking set of stakeholders holding the reins2 that 
adopted tribalizing policies and created a macroeconomically unsustainable state of 
affairs. Multiple clan-based rebel groups flourished, leading to a civil war which ravaged 
much of Somalia since 1988, instigating the migration of most educated Somalis and the 
overthrow of Siyad Barre’s regime in 1991.4 With formal institutions and government 
infrastructure being destroyed and a civil war splintering the country into several 
autonomous regions, in 1991 Somalia entered into the longest period of complete state 
collapse in postcolonial history.5 Despite numerous attempts to resurrect national and 
federal state authority, Somalia’s protracted period of state failure lasted about two 
decades. It was only in 2012 that the signing of a provisional constitution enabled the 
current political settlement.6
The country’s notable reform momentum in recent years is grounds for cautious 
optimism. Somalia has undergone incremental progress on many fronts since the 
signing of its provisional constitution in 2012. The emergence of federalism through 
the establishment of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the creation of 
new federal member states (FMS)7 has enabled a return to a path of reconstruction 
and a certain regularization of political processes, with relatively peaceful power 
transfers in 2012, 2017, and 2022. Political dialogue continues to advance gradually 
and in a nonlinear fashion under the umbrella of the National Consultative Council 
(NCC) chaired by the president of FGS and attended by the leaders of FMS. The 
NCC has strengthened intergovernmental fiscal relations, revised the national security 
architecture, harmonized the election schedule, and endorsed a strategy to fight 
Al-Shabaab. Significant progress in building institutions and regulatory frameworks, 
strengthening core government systems and capacity, and improving public financial 
management and domestic revenue mobilization has also been made. Social protection 
systems, the financial sector, and the business environment have been enhanced 
considerably, and a series of macrofinancial reforms has been put into action over 
the course of five consecutive International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff-monitored 
programs.8 In March 2020, Somalia reached the heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) 
Decision Point, gaining access to new development finance and helping to incentivize 
critical economic reforms. Having reached the HIPC Completion Point, Somalia will 
qualify for full and irrevocable debt relief, eliminating a decades-long debt burden.9 In 
addition, in recent years, progress has been made in a range of sectors, including human 
capital development, infrastructure, urban development, and climate change mitigation 
and adaptation.
=== PAGE 24 ===
|  2  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
However, a diverse set of interwoven and structural challenges contribute to Somalia’s 
protracted state of FCV and pose a risk to the state-building agenda. While the root 
causes of FCV in Somalia are complex and multifaceted, the World Bank’s recent Risk 
and Resilience Assessment (RRA) put forward a framework to conceptualize the main 
drivers of FCV as follows: (a) continued intrastate instability and elite contestation, (b) 
fractured relations between the state and citizens, and (c) deep-seated intercommunal 
divisions (see figure 1.1). 
Collectively, these drivers are mutually reinforcing, perpetuating vicious cycles of FCV 
that hinder the attainment of peace, security, and sustainable development. Intrastate 
instability and contestation have been characterized by the roadblocks faced by political 
leaders in their endeavor to reach a consensus on the division of responsibilities and 
resources between the FGS and FMS on key issues such as security and defense, 
resource sharing, fiscal responsibilities, and the distribution of humanitarian and 
development assistance. These dynamics, as well as Somalis’ traditional distrust of 
the concentration of power, have led to a fragile social contract between citizens and 
the state. Trust in government is severely undermined by perceptions of corruption 
and diversion of public resources, including externally provided humanitarian 
and development assistance, or the exclusion of groups from the benefits of that 
assistance. Informal hybrid governance arrangements10 are also entrenched, with a 
majority of Somalis having been accustomed to their prevalence and to the absence 
of functioning state institutions for most of their lives.11 Relatedly, domestic revenue 
Source: 	 World Bank, “Somalia Risk and Resilience Assessment” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2023). 
Note: 	
FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence; RRA = Risk and Resilience Assessment.
FIGURE 1.1 DRIVERS OF FCV IDENTIFIED IN SOMALIA RRA 
The failure to establish a stable political settlement 
between central and subnational elites, as well as 
to reach consensus on the division of responsibilities 
and resources in a federal system, driven by a zero-sum 
approach to the accumulation of authority and the spoils 
of government, and exacerbated by external actors.
STATE-STATE
1
The protracted absence, and the subsequent 
weakness and exploitation of nascent state  
institutions through entrenched corruption 
and elite capture, undermining their ability to 
deliver basic services—including security, justice, 
and social services—and resulting in a fractured 
social contract that provides space for competing 
forms of state-building.
STATE-SOCIETY
2
Deep-seated intercommunal divisions, 
characterized by clan dynamics and social 
power structures that entrench systemic 
exclusion, stoke inter-societal divisions, 
and consolidate the marginalization 
of groups that may be prepared to use 
violence to achieve political aims.
SOCIETY-SOCIETY
3
=== PAGE 25 ===
|  3  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
mobilization, while on the rise, remains low,12 in a context of a very narrow tax base 
and deeply rooted hybrid formal-informal taxing arrangements.13 Finally, deep-seated 
intercommunal divisions and political cleavages exist to this day, as evidenced by 
Somalia’s splintering into several autonomous regions during the civil war and the 
country’s decades of state failure.14 The continuing marginalization of particular groups 
further stokes intersocietal divisions, which in some cases can lead to the emergence and 
escalation of violence. Importantly, Al-Shabaab serves as both a product and a source 
of FCV, capitalizing on these drivers of FCV to maintain its influence, including beyond 
the areas it controls directly.
Despite progress made over the past decade, the state-building process continues to face 
significant challenges. Somalia continues to be ranked as the most fragile state in the 
world by the Fragile States Index of the Fund for Peace.15 Although reported conflict-
related incidents and fatalities had been decreasing in recent years, 2022 and 2023 have 
seen a notable uptick, due mostly to the large-scale offensive against, and reprisals by, 
Al-Shabaab in central and southern Somalia.16 A military campaign launched against 
the group in 2022 has resulted in the recovery of multiple towns in central Somalia, 
though it has also prompted a violent backlash from Al-Shabaab, which retains its 
ability to carry out targeted acts of violence and extort businesses. Looking ahead, 
the government’s ability to hold territory newly recovered from Al-Shabaab and to 
introduce relative security and stability will demonstrate whether Somalia is ready for 
the planned withdrawal of African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) forces 
in 2024. This context also poses significant challenges for private sector investment, as 
discussed in box 1.1. 
The unfinished political settlement between the FGS and FMS will define what can be 
achieved in the foreseeable future, with limited progress made on key issues such as 
finalizing the constitution and a recent deterioration in intergovernmental relations. 
Somalia’s institutional structure remains embedded within a provisional constitution that 
often lacks clarity on key decisions related to the distribution of power, revenue sources, 
and functions among different levels of government.17 Importantly, political incentives for 
national and local elites are sometimes at odds, making state-building progress nonlinear 
and subject to backsliding,18 with government legitimacy remaining low.19 
BOX 1.1 SOMALIA’S PROTRACTED CONFLICTS CALL FOR A CONFLICT-SENSITIVE APPROACH  
TO PRIVATE SECTOR INVESTMENT 
The dynamic conflict situation in Somalia requires 
investors and businesses operating in the country 
to take a practical conflict-sensitive approach 
to their operations to avoid exacerbating the 
existing FCV dynamics. The rise in insecurity in 
recent years (figures B1.1.1 and B1.1.2),a particularly in 
areas such as Middle Shabelle, Lower Shabelle, Hiraan, 
and Galguduud, has effects on businesses; supply 
routes for goods and services, including food aid; and 
a. 	In 2022, conflict fatalities increased by 133 percent compared to the two previous years, according to the Africa Center for 
Strategic Studies (https://africacenter.org/spotlight/fatalities-from-militant-islamist-violence-in-africa-surge-by- 
nearly-50-percent/).
access to land. The private sector must navigate the 
daily operational challenges related to armed groups 
and access to markets and services such as electricity, 
with a need for conflict sensitivity approaches in close 
coordination with local communities. This includes 
understanding the local FCV dynamics, engaging 
stakeholders, managing risks around security forces, 
and adopting “do no harm” practices for business.
=== PAGE 26 ===
|  4  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
FIGURE B1.1.2 TREND IN FCV INCIDENTS AND FATALITIES (2018-2023)
Source: 	 The Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED), 2021-2023; www.acleddata.com.
Note: 	
FCV = fragile, conflict, and violence; RRA = risk and resilience assessment.
FIGURE B1.1.1 CONCENTRATION OF CONFLICT- RELATED FATALITIES IN SOMALIA 
 (2021-2023)  
Number of reported conflict fatalities in Somalia by region, January 1, 2021– June 30, 2023
Source: 	 The Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED), 
2021-2023; www.acleddata.com.
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sept
Nov
2018	
2019	
2020	
2021	
2022	
2023
Incidents                        Fatalities
=== PAGE 27 ===
|  5  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Socioeconomic vulnerability is exacerbated by the country’s fragility, as well as recurrent 
climatic shocks. Although there are some spatial variations across regions in Somalia 
(figure 2.2), citizens throughout the country suffer from high levels of poverty and low 
levels of human development. The most recent poverty assessments by the World Bank 
suggest that almost 80 percent of Somalis are poor or near-poor.20 This proportion has 
likely increased since these estimates were made because of the diverse shocks that have 
affected Somalia, including COVID-19, locust infestation, and recurrent floods and 
drought.21 Furthermore, around 90 percent of Somalis suffer from at least one facet of 
multidimensional vulnerability,22 with monetary poverty being correlated to multiple 
deprivations (for example, education, water, electricity, and sanitation). As such, 
Somalia is estimated to be in the bottom 10 countries in the world in terms of human 
development,23 and many of its citizens have died prematurely of preventable diseases 
that are correlated with enduring poverty and a lack of access to services.24 Climatic 
shocks, such as recurrent and severe droughts, deepen Somalia’s underlying fragility 
and significantly increase humanitarian needs (box 2.2). An estimated 8.25 million 
people—around half of the population—will need humanitarian assistance in 2023, up 
from 7.7 million in 2022 and 5.9 million in 2021.25 As of March 2023, Somalia had an 
estimated 3.86 million internally displaced persons (IDPs). Moreover, food insecurity 
remains consistently high in Somalia, with about 4.3 million people (25 percent of the 
population) likely to experience high levels of acute food insecurity between October 
and December 2023.26 
FIGURE 1.2 MAP OF POVERTY INCIDENCE AT THE DISTRICT LEVEL, BASED 
ON SATELLITE IMPUTATION, 2019
Sources: 	Flowminder and WorldPop. Taken from Utz Pape and Philip Wollburg, “Estimation of 
Poverty in Somalia Using Innovative Methodologies” (Policy Research Working Paper 
8735, World Bank, February 2019).
Note: 	
PPP = purchasing power parity.
=== PAGE 28 ===
|  6  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
BOX 1.2 SOMALIA’S VULNERABILITY TO NATURAL DISASTERS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
Compounding crises posed by climatic shocks 
deepen Somalis’ vulnerability. The majority of 
southern Somalia is semi-arid, and most of the rest 
of the country is arid with infertile soils and restricted 
freshwater resources at ground level. Seasons are 
highly unreliable and inconsistent because of the spatial 
and temporal variability of the climate (for instance, 
the unpredictability of rain precipitation)—Somalia has 
one of the highest interannual variations of rainfall in 
Africa, and there is increasing difficulty in predicting 
weather phenomena in the country.a Climatic hazards 
such as floods and droughts are also very frequent 
(figure B2.2.1). The country has experienced at least one 
drought every year since the 1960s, and the frequency 
and intensity of these events have been increasing.b 
Accordingly, climatic shocks in recent years have 
prompted severe drought conditions in 90 percent 
of the Somali territory and, in combination with the 
2020–21 locust infestation, have led to the following: 
(a) a reduction of 60 to 80 percent of the production 
of many agricultural crops, (b) the decimation of 
rangelands, and (c) acute shortages of pasture and 
water.c As agriculture and livestock remain the 
backbone of livelihoods in Somalia, this situation 
has inflicted widespread impacts on the country’s 
population (figure B2.2.2), especially on women.d
9
6
3
0
1980	
1990	
2000	
2010	
2020  2023
FIGURE B1.2.1 KEY NATURAL HAZARD STATISTICS FOR 1980–2020  
Number of people affected (in million)
Source: 	 EM-DAT public database, accessed on July 10, 2023.
Drought            Flood            Epidemic            Storm            Earthquake
=== PAGE 29 ===
|  7  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
a. 	Gianni Zanini et al., Somalia: Country Economic Memorandum, vol. 1. Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia 
(Washington, DC: World Bank and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2018). 
b. 	Albert Tuinhof et al., Economics of Water: Digging for Data—Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or Enabling Factor for 
Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2021).
c. 	World Bank, “Somalia Economic Update, June 2022: Investing in Social Protection to Boost Resilience for Economic 
Growth” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2022). 
d. 	Women are disproportionately affected by climate shocks. Opportunities created by the country’s green transition have 
also excessively benefited men, with existing patterns of occupational sex segregation, skills gaps, and gaps in female labor 
force participation putting women at a disadvantage. 
e. 	Katy Richardson et al., Climate Risk Report for the East Africa Region (Exeter, UK: Met Office, Overseas Development Institute, 
and Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, 2022), https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/climate-risk-re-
port-east-africa-region.
f. 	 The projected warming of the next decades in Somalia is correlated to further drought vulnerability.
g. 	Climate Central coastal risk screening tool, https://coastal.climatecentral.org/map/.
Furthermore, the profound impact of natural 
disasters in Somalia will likely worsen because of 
climate change. Precipitation has been decreasing 
in the country throughout the past four decades, 
especially during the rainy season, a trend that will 
likely continue as more common and lengthy dry 
spells are projected in conjunction with an increased 
frequency and intensity of heavy rainstorms.e Annual 
average temperatures have also been increasing and 
are estimated to continue their uptrend by 3°C to 4°C 
by 2080 under a low-mitigation scenario,f which 
remains the current global trajectory. Oddly, this will 
likely make both droughts and floods more frequent 
and severe in Somalia in the medium to long term. 
Similarly, while there is a lack of research on the 
effects of sea level rise and coastal inundation in 
Somalia, projections suggest that coastal communities 
and livelihood systems are likely to be affected by 
threats to the country’s shoreline.g
FIGURE B1.2.2 SHOCKS EXPERIENCED BY HOUSEHOLD, 2022 
Percentage of surveyed households
Source: 	 World Bank, 2022 Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey. 
Urban
Rural
Nomadic
Drought or severe water shortage            Livestock            Flood            Crop disease/Pest            Conflict            Fire/Storm
36.6
52.6
18.9
4.3
3.4
2.0
0.2
87.2
4.6
2.3
2.1
3.1
0.3
5.0
3.3
1.7
3.1
0.4
=== PAGE 30 ===
|  8  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
1.2	 MACROECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
The Somali economy has been remarkably resilient and possesses considerable 
potential. In effect, state collapse seems to have been positive for the development of 
the economy, as the vanishing of Siyad Barre’s state institutions “was in many ways 
a blessing for the domestic market.”27 This resilience has also been key since 2012, 
when FGS was established, and has resulted in considerably more growth than in 
Sub-Saharan Africa and FCV countries on average (figures 1.3 and 1.4) and by other 
recent shocks to the economy.28 Welfare has also improved modestly in recent decades. 
Somalia was better off with respect to a series of economic and social indicators during 
its period of statelessness than it was in the second decade of Siyad Barre’s regime,29 
and there have been some improvements in welfare since 2012.30 Somalia also has 
ample economic potential. It could become an economic integrator and a gateway 
to international markets,31 and it boasts abundant resources, including hydrocarbon, 
minerals, renewable energy, livestock, and fisheries.
However, economic growth has been insufficient to generate enough inclusive economic 
opportunities for Somalia’s expanding population. Merely 21.7 percent of adult 
respondents to the latest household survey in Somalia were employed,32 and only 
25.9 percent of Somalis are working or seeking employment.33 This is in contrast to 
employment rates of 61.8 percent in Sub-Saharan African countries and 56.4 percent 
in FCV countries34 and average labor force participation rates of 66.3 percent in Sub-
Saharan African countries and 60.7 percent in FCV countries.35 Furthermore, jobs in 
Somalia are mostly unproductive and fail to provide meaningful incomes for Somalis, 
with worker productivity estimated at less than one-quarter of the Sub-Saharan African 
average.36 Somali workers are as likely to live in extreme poverty as the unemployed. 
FIGURE 1.3  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (GDP) 
GROWTH (IN CONSTANT 2015 US$): SOMALIA 
VERSUS COMPARATORS
FIGURE 1.4  GDP GROWTH (IN CONSTANT 2015 US$) 
PER CAPITA: SOMALIA VERSUS COMPARATORS
Source: 	 World Development Indicators (WDI).
Note: 	
FCS = fragile and conflict-affected situation;  
SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: 	 World Development Indicators (WDI).
Note: 	
FCS = fragile and conflict-affected situation;  
SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.
Somalia            SSA            FCS countries            World
Somalia            SSA            FCS countries            World
6.7%
2.8%
2.1%
3.0%
1.1%
1.9%
-0.5%
-2.5%
2.1%
2.9%
0.1%
-0.1%
1.9%
1.2%
-2.1%
-0.7%
2013 – 2019
2013 – 2019
2020 – 2022
2020 – 2022
=== PAGE 31 ===
|  9  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Somali women are particularly disadvantaged amid these unfavorable economic 
conditions, as social norms largely restrict them to either unpaid domestic labor or low-
paying activities (primarily own-account work and self-employment) undertaken out of 
economic necessity, with the best opportunities reserved for men. Consequently, gender 
gaps in employment and labor force participation rates are around 21 and 23 percent, 
respectively, and are almost twice as high during core reproductive years.37 Furthermore, 
employed women often work less than 30 hours a week in casual, low-paying jobs with 
low-value-added activities that can accommodate their domestic responsibilities.38
Thus, Somalia’s high fertility and urbanization rates have contributed to fragility 
instead of incentivizing growth. As Somalia’s population growth and total fertility 
rates are some of the highest in the world, at 3.15 percent and 6.31 children per 
women, respectively,39 about 74 percent of the Somali population is under age 30 and 
approximately 47 percent is under age 15.40 Somalia’s youthful population structure 
could lead to a demographic dividend for many years to come, but the aforementioned 
levels of economic growth and job generation impede any demographic dividend from 
kicking in (figure 1.5), prolonging the country’s levels of poverty incidence. Rapid 
urbanization due to forced displacement has also become a driver of fragility. IDPs rely 
on household businesses and informal employment more than other urban dwellers. 
Hence, urbanization is leading to an uncontrolled urban sprawl that is fueling an 
exacerbation of social tensions due to competition over scarce livelihood resources 
(such as land and water) in host communities,41 instead of generating agglomeration 
economies. In effect, both employment and labor force participation rates are lower in 
urban locations than in rural areas.42 This will likely worsen in the near to midterm if 
the status quo persists. With over 75 percent of IDPs residing in urban areas, the urban 
population is already 46 percent of the country’s total population and is estimated to 
increase by nearly 4 million by 203043 (figure 1.6).
15    16    17    18    19    20   21    22    23    24    25   26   27    28   29   3 0   31    32    33    34
2000    2005    2010      2015     2020     2025     2030    2035    2040     2045     2050
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
FIGURE 1.5 TYPE OF EMPLOYMENT BY AGE 
GROUP IN SOMALIA, 2021
FIGURE 1.6 FORECAST OF POPULATION GROWTH 
IN URBAN VERSUS TOTAL SETTINGS IN SOMALIA 
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on the Somali 
High Frequency Survey (SHFS) 2017–18. Taken from 
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor 
and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
2021).
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on the SHFS 
2017–18. Taken from Wendy Karamba, Improving Access 
to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank, 2021).
Age
100
80
60
40
20
0
% of employed age cohort
Population (thousands)
Urban population     Rural population
Non-agricultural  
self-employed
Non-agricultural  
wage-employed
Agricultural  
self-employed
Agricultural  
wage-employed
=== PAGE 32 ===
|  10  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
The permanence of the jobs that have been generated in Somalia is also precarious, 
as recent growth is consumption driven and largely underpinned by external financial 
flows with uncertain prospects. Somalia’s main driver of growth from the demand 
side has been private consumption, with consumption increasing at a greater rate 
than the country’s GDP (figure 1.7). As such, the latest World Bank High Frequency 
Survey estimated that final consumption expenditure in 2021 was US$11.4 billion, 
or 116 percent of the country’s US$9.8 billion GDP. Given Somalia’s large structural 
deficit in its external balance of goods and services and its moderate levels of foreign 
direct investment (FDI),44 this increase in consumption has been supported primarily 
by official development assistance (ODA) and remittances. ODA accounted for 
approximately 33 percent of GDP in 2022 (figure 1.8).45 Remittances from the Somali 
diaspora is another important source of support.46 With the fourth largest proportion 
of nationals living abroad worldwide as of 2021,47 regular inflow of remittances has 
become an established livelihood and survival practice for an estimated 40 to 60 
percent of Somali households,48 with aggregated remittance flows estimated to have 
reached about 20.6 percent of GDP in 202249 (likely more when unrecorded flows 
are accounted for).50 However, prospects for the magnitude of ODA and remittances 
to Somalia are uncertain. As Somalia looks toward a post-HIPC environment, the 
country must prepare for a state of affairs in which financing will be on concessional 
lending terms linked to its fiscal and debt sustainability—which might be constraining 
if domestic revenue mobilization is not improved considerably. Similarly, remittances 
from the Somali diaspora will possibly dwindle in the near to medium term, as most of 
the population that left the country in the early days of the civil war is getting older and 
retiring, and newer generations of the diaspora may grow increasingly detached and less 
inclined to send money to distant relatives.51
FIGURE 1.7  NOMINAL GDP GROWTH AND FINAL 
CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE GROWTH IN  
SOMALIA, 2013–22 
FIGURE 1.8  DISAGGREGATED CURRENT ACCOUNT 
BALANCE IN SOMALIA, 2022  
Source: 	 World Bank, WDI data.
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product.
% of GDP
6.8%
7.0%
Final consumption expenditure
GDP growth
Sources: 	Somali authorities, International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
and World Bank forecasts, March 2023.
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product;  
ODA = official development assistance.
21
33
-61
-8
Remittances
ODA
Trade balance
Current account 
balance
=== PAGE 33 ===
|  11  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Notes
1.	
Abdi Ismail Samatar and Ahmed I. Samatar, “Somalis as Africa’s First Democrats: Premier Adbirazak H. Hussein and President 
Aden A. Osman,” Bildhaan: An International Journal of Somali Studies 2, article 4 (2008): 1–64; and William Zartman, ed., Collapsed 
States: The Disintegration and Restoration of Legitimate Authority (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1995).
2.	
Terrence Lyons and Ahmed Samatar, Somalia: State Collapse, Multilateral Intervention, and Strategies of Political Reconstruction 
(Brookings Occasional Papers, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1995).
3.	
For more on this topic, see K. Menkhaus, “State Failure, State-Building, and Prospects for a ‘Functional Failed State’ in 
Somalia,” ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 656, no. 1 (October 9, 2014): 154–72, https://doi.
org/10.1177/0002716214547002; and Alex de Waal, The Real Politics of the Horn of Africa: Money, War and the Business of 
Power (Cambridge, UK, and Malden, MA: Polity Press, 2015).
4.	
Ken Menkhaus, Trends in Somali Society, Governance, Environment, and Transnational Relations: An Introduction and Synthesis 
(Nairobi, Kenya: Rift Valley Institute, January 2021).
5.	
This CPSD defines state collapse as a situation in which a state can no longer perform its basic functions as an accepted 
source of identity, as an arena of politics, as a tangible organization of effective decision-making, and as the security 
guarantor for a populated territory. For a more detailed discussion of state collapse, see Zartman, Collapsed States.
6.	
Having said this, state building has been a gradual process since 2000, with periods of important progress and stagnation or 
decline both before and after 2012.
7.	
There are five FMS, of which four are new (namely, Jubaland, South-West State, Galmudug, and Hirshabelle), Puntland having 
been formed earlier. Somaliland in the northwest is a semiautonomous region which claims independence from Somalia and 
has maintained a separate government system in the past few decades.
8.	
IMF security management plans in Somalia were completed successfully between 2016 and 2022. 
9.	
Somalia’s debt will be irrevocably reduced from US$5.2 billion at end 2018 to an estimated US$557 million in net present value 
terms once the country reaches its HIPC Completion Point.
10.	
The system of governance without government that arose during more than two decades of statelessness in Somalia draws 
on a combination of customary authority, sharia courts, and business leaders, among other nonstate actors. 
11.	
More than 80 percent of the population was born after Somalia’s civil war started in 1988. 
12.	
FGS’s domestic revenue increased from 1.0 to 2.7 percent of GDP between 2013 and 2022. However, Somalia continues to 
have the smallest domestic revenue mobilization rate as a proportion of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa, which has an average 
tax-to-GDP ratio of 18.6 percent. As such, Somalia is currently unable to cover its fiscal expenditures, making the country 
dependent on external budget support grants (for example, from the International Development Association, the European 
Union, and Türkiye). For more information on this topic, see Gael Raballand and Justine Knebelmann, “Domestic Resource 
Mobilization in Somalia,” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021); and IMF, Somalia: IMF Staff Report for the Sixth Review Under 
the Extended Credit Facility (December 2023).
13.	
For more information on this topic, see K. Jordan, “Community-Based and Customary Taxation in South-Central Somalia: 
Possibilities for Hybrid Governance and Dialogue Programming” (Danish Refugee Council, Copenhagen, 2016); Valeria 
Saggiomo, “From Charity to Governance: Islamic NGOs and Education in Somalia,” Open Area Studies Journal 4, no. 53 (2011): 
61; Vanessa Van den Boogaard and Fabrizio Santoro, “Explaining Informal Taxation and Revenue Generation: Evidence from 
South-Central Somalia” (ICTD Working Paper 118, International Centre for Tax and Development, Brighton, UK, 2021); and 
Vanessa Van den Boogaard and Fabrizio Santoro, “Financing Governance beyond the State: Informal Revenue Generation in 
South-Central Somalia,” African Affairs 121, no. 485 (October 5, 2022): 569–94.
14.	
Menkhaus, Trends in Somali Society.
15.	
Fragile States Index, 2023, https://fragilestatesindex.org/country-data/. 
16.	
Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED) data, 2023. 
17.	
For more information on this front, see Charles Manga Fombad, Assefa Fiseha, and Nico Steytler, Contemporary Governance 
Challenges in the Horn of Africa (Milton Park, UK: Routledge, 2023), 226–53.
18.	
World Bank, “Completion and Learning Review of the Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia—
FY19–23” (World Bank, Washington, DC, March 29, 2023.
19.	
According to a recent US Agency for International Development (USAID) perception survey, only 14 percent of Somalis 
completely trust FGS. See L. Robertson, L. Malla, and L. Oing, “The Emerging Federal States, Mogadishu, and Puntland” 
(Somalia Program Support Services, Somalia Perception Survey, part 1, USAID, Washington, DC, 2017). By the same token, 
according to the State Legitimacy Indicator of the Fragile States Index, Somalia has the 11th greatest legitimacy deficit in the 
world.
=== PAGE 34 ===
|  12  |
	
COUNTRY CONTEXT 
20.	
With about 69 percent of Somalis living below the poverty line (US$1.90 per day in purchasing power parity) and an 
additional 10 percent living within 20 percent of that poverty line. For more information on this front, see Shinya Takamatsu, 
Nobuo Yoshida, and Apichoke Kotikula, “Rapid Consumption Method and Poverty and Inequality Estimation in Somalia 
Revisited” (Global Poverty Monitoring Technical Note 19, World Bank, Washington, DC, March 2022); and World Bank, 
“Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey” (World Bank, 
Washington, DC, 2019).
21.	
World Bank, “Macro Poverty Outlook for Somalia: April 2022—Datasheet” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2022).
22.	
World Bank , “Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment." 
23.	
While the Human Development Index for Somalia has not been constructed because of a lack of data, the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) estimates life expectancy at birth to be 57 years in 2023, which is similar to the life 
expectancy in countries that rank 182nd to 191st (out of 191) in the Human Development Index.
24.	
Gender gaps in literacy persist across all age groups and are particularly vast (ranging up to 40 percentage points) at greater 
ages (35 years and over). Similarly, women are more likely than men to report suffering from a chronic illness, disability, or 
accident. For more information on this topic, see Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget 
Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 2023.
25.	
OCHA (UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs), “Somalia Humanitarian Needs 
Overview 2023 (February 2023),” reliefweb, February 8, 2023, https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/
somalia-humanitarian-needs-overview-2023-february-2023.
26.	
FUSNAU (Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit), FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), “IPC 
Acute Food Insecurity and Acute Malnutrition Analysis—Somalia,” September 18, 2023, https://fsnau.org/downloads/Somalia-
IPC-Acute-Food-Insecurity-Malnutrition-Report-Aug-Dec-2023.pdf.
27.	
Jamil Mubarak, “The ‘Hidden Hand’ behind the Resilience of the Stateless Economy of Somalia,”World Development 25, no. 12 
(1997): 2027–41.
28.	
Economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic has been affected by other shocks, such as higher commodity prices 
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and a severe drought. From the demand side, the main driver of growth is private 
consumption, which has been affected by higher prices and widespread food insecurity.
29.	
For more information, see Peter Leeson, “Better Off Stateless: Somalia before and after Government Collapse,” Journal of 
Comparative Economics 35 (2007): 689–710; and Benjamin Powell, Ryan Ford, and Alex Nowrasteh, “Somalia after State 
Collapse: Chaos or Improvement?,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 67, no. 3–4 (2008): 657–70.
30.	
For instance, health indicators such as infant and maternal mortality have improved. Literacy, net primary school enrollment, 
and access to some basic services such as sanitation and electricity have also increased. Similarly, financial inclusion has 
increased. 
31.	
Somalia is located at the intersection of four regions (namely, Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East) and with several 
landlocked countries (for instance, Ethiopia) within the greater Horn of Africa region. For more information on this, see 
Matías Herrera Dappe and Mathilde Sylvie Maria Lebrand, “Infrastructure and Structural Change in the Horn of Africa” (Policy 
Research Working Paper 9870, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021). 
32.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS." 
33.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, "2022 SIHBS."
34.	
World Bank, WDI DataBank, modeled International Labour Organization (ILO) estimate, 2021.
35.	
World Bank, WDI DataBank, modeled ILO estimate.
36.	
World Bank, “Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government: Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow 
and Prosper” (World Bank, Washington, DC, June 1, 2022).
37.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS”; and UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund), Economic Characteristics of 
the Somalia People, vol. 4 (New York: UNFPA, 2016).
38.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “Labour Force Survey Report: LFS 2019,” 2021; UNFPA, Economic Characteristics of the 
Somalia People; and World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum—Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, 2021).
39.	
World Bank, WDI DataBank; and 2020 Somalia Health and Demographic Survey (SHDS).
40.	
World Bank, WDI DataBank, 2021 data.
41.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2020); 
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees), “Somalia: Protection Analysis Update (September 2022),” 
reliefweb, September 30, 2022; and Filiep Decorte and Ombretta Tempra, ”Improving Living Conditions in Bossaso, Somalia,” 
Forced Migration Review 34 (February 2010): 16–18.
=== PAGE 35 ===
|  13  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
42.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS.”
43.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review; and UNHCR, “Somalia: Protection Analysis Update.”
44.	
According to IMF’s 2022 Article IV consultation report, FDI in Somalia for 2022 is estimated to be about US$652 million. FDI 
statistics for Somalia are not entirely reliable, as they are calculated as a residual given the scarcity of data in the country, 
and a large proportion of FDI in Somalia is likely composed of small investments by the country’s diaspora.
45.	
World Bank, “Completion and Learning Review of the Country Partnership Framework.” 
46.	
Laura Hammond et al. Cash and Compassion: The Role of the Somali Diaspora in Relief, Development and Peacebuilding (UNDP 
Somalia, 2011); Anna Lindley, “Remittances in Fragile Settings: A Somali Case Study” (HiCN [Households in Conflict Network] 
Working Paper 27, HiCN, 2007); and Anna Lindley, The Early Morning Phonecall: Somali Refugees' Remittances (DGO—digital 
original, 1, Berghahn Books, 2010), http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qddnh.
47.	
According to Failed State Index data in 2022, Somalia is ranked as the country with the fourth most human flight and brain 
drain in the world.
48.	
Nauja Kleist and Masud Abdi, "Global Connections: Somali Diaspora and Their Effects" (Rift Valley Institute for the World 
Bank Group, March 2021).
49.	
Forecast by Somali authorities, IMF, and World Bank, March 2023.
50.	
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021).
51.	
Kleist and Abdi, "Global Connections."
=== PAGE 36 ===
|  14  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR 
2.
The private sector has been the primary driver of economic resilience in Somalia. It 
has been the economic foundation of the country and its largest employer since the 
last decade of Siyad Barre’s regime.1 In a context with no state-owned enterprises 
(and government expenditure that still accounts for a negligible proportion of GDP),2 
the private sector accounts for an estimated 95 percent of total jobs created.3 FGS’s 
employee budget is in effect more or less equivalent to that of a single private sector 
conglomerate.4 Furthermore, private businesses are the primary providers of almost 
all of the limited range of products and services on offer in Somalia. This includes not 
only commercial goods and services, but also services that are traditionally delivered 
by the state,5 including social services and public goods (such as energy, information 
and communication technology [ICT] connectivity, and water).6 Many private 
sector firms also funnel substantial amounts of capital to the public sphere through 
corporate social responsibility programs in communities across the country, which are 
sometimes a result of the direct request of clan elders7 and are earmarked for a range of 
humanitarian issues and public goods.8
However, the current state of the private sector is limiting Somalia’s inclusive and 
sustainable growth. While there are significant variations across regions of the country, 
the limited data that exist point to the following four traits that seem to characterize the 
private sector across the country:
•	 Somali productive tradable sectors are generally subdued and fail to provide a strong 
basis for a rapid structural transformation. This trait drives Somalia’s dependence on 
imports and leads to a concentration of businesses in nontradable sectors.
•	 A few large conglomerates have captured most opportunities in the nontradable 
sectors that dominate the Somali economy. These large conglomerates have 
underpinned the country’s economic resilience, but they also tend to leverage 
their position to distort and capture markets at the expense of other players and 
consumers, limiting the potential inclusivity and sustainability of private sector 
growth. 
•	 The Somali private sector has a missing middle, with firms being primarily 
microformal, informal, and household (HH) subsistence-based entrepreneurial 
ventures. These businesses are limited in their ability to shift workers from small 
enterprises into medium and large ones and in their capacity to generate productive 
jobs.
•	 FDI inflows into Somalia, while moderate, are surprisingly high as a proportion 
of GDP, considering the country’s fragility. However, they have failed to promote 
productivity growth. 
These traits will be explored further in this chapter.
=== PAGE 37 ===
|  15  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
2.1	 PRIVATE SECTOR’S CONCENTRATION IN NONTRADABLE 
SECTORS
Productive sectors in Somalia are trapped in low-value-added activities. With most 
of Somalia’s productive assets, infrastructure, and investment capital having been 
taken away during and after the collapse of Siyad Barre’s regime,9 the country has low 
economic complexity. Its manufacturing sector was destroyed once the civil was broke 
out, with remaining factories being dismantled and their contents exported as scrap.10  
Even with the improvements that have resulted from international intervention and a 
small number of investments in recent decades11 and despite the rapid growth of some 
types of manufacturing (for example, food and beverages manufacturing had a 15 
percent growth rate between 2017 and 2019),12 the sector as a whole continues to be 
negligible. Manufacturing currently represents only 15 percent of established businesses 
(which generate merely 12 percent of established firm jobs or about 0.8 percent of total 
jobs in Somalia)13 and about 2.4 percent of HH businesses (or less than 1 percent of 
total jobs).14 The sector’s productivity levels are also lower than those of virtually all 
other economic sectors in the country (figure 2.1). Thus, structural transformation has 
been negligible and is likely to continue to be marginal in the short term. Primary low-
value-added livestock, fishery, and agricultural goods account for most of the country’s 
productive sector, generating most of the jobs that are outside commerce and other 
nontradable services (namely, 26 percent of employment).15 Additionally, they comprise 
the lion’s share of Somalia’s export basket. Disaggregated mirror trade statistics show 
their contribution at about 73 percent of Somalia’s exports (figure 2.2), and other 
analyses estimate their contribution at over 90 percent of locally produced exports.16 
Established business     HH enterprises
FIGURE 2.1 VALUE OF EXPORTS BY TYPE OF 
PRODUCT IN SOMALIA, 2021 
FIGURE 2.2 PRODUCTIVITY BY SECTOR RELATIVE 
TO RETAIL IN SOMALIA, 2019  
Source: 	 Observatory of Economic Complexity.
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on 2012 Somalil 
and Enterprise Survey, Somali High Frequency Survey 
2017–18, and 2019 Enterprise Surveys in Mogadishu 
and Bosaso.
Note: 	
HH = household.
Total exports and % of total exports
Estimates of log sales per worker per day
-1.0   -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2   0.0    0.2     0.4    0.6     0.8
Livestock
Gold
Vegetable products
Animal products and hides
Metal and mineral products
Others
5%
7%
15%
20%
51%
US$482 million
-0.56
-0.76
-0.22
-0.61
-0.15
0.61
0.16
0.09
2%
100%
Food and beverage manufacturing
Other manufacturing
Services (other)
Hospitality
Transportation
Agriculture, livestock, agribusiness
=== PAGE 38 ===
|  16  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Despite the prevalence and relative comparative advantage of Somali livestock, 
crop, and fishery products, these sectors are generally subdued. While livestock, 
fisheries, and agriculture account for nearly all Somali products with a high relative 
comparative advantage,17 they have suffered a considerable deterioration in recent 
decades. Because of Somalia’s rapid urbanization and significant vulnerability to 
climate shocks, survivalist strategies historically used by Somali stakeholders18 in these 
sectors have come under mounting strain.19 As a result, these sectors have gone from 
generating a large proportion of jobs in Somalia20 to accounting for only 26 percent of 
employment now, including subsistence and market-linked jobs.21 They are also highly 
underdeveloped and unproductive (figure 2.2). As such, the livestock, fishery, and 
crop sectors remain the primary productive sectors of the country, not because of their 
success but rather because diversification of productive activities, while possible (figure 
2.3), is challenging. Women carry out the bulk of labor and business activity across 
these sectors but remain trapped in subsistence-level production because of constraints 
on their access to markets and networks.22
FIGURE 2.3 PRODUCTS WITH POTENTIAL—SOMALIA
Source: 	 International Trade Center (ITC), https://exportpotential.intracen.org/en/products/analyze?fromMarker=i&export-
er=706&toMarker=w&market=w&whatMarker=k;  (accessed February 2024).
Note: 	
excl = excluding; n.e.s. = not elsewhere specified.
Relatedness, demand, and supply indexes
Somalia
in
World
Live animals (except poultry)
Precious metals
Food products n.e.s.  
(processed or preserved
Fish & Shellfish
Oil seeds
Fruits
Meat (except poultry)
Ferrous metalsNuts
Fish products (processed)
Waste, n.e.s.
Beauty products & perfumes
Skin, leather & products thereof
Aircrafts, spacecrafts & parts
Somalia’s products with potential
1,2,3    Product diversification rank
            Demand
            Supply
1. Gold, unwrought, for 
non-monetary purposes
2. Live goats
5. Sesame seeds
7. Lemon & limes,  
    fresh or dried
3. Live sheep
4. Lac; natural gums  
    (excl. gum arabic)...
6. Lobster n.e.s.,  
    frozen
8. Fish n.e.s., whole, frozen
9. Live bovine animals
10. Live mammals
11. Aquatic 
invertebrates 
& edible...
12. Goat meat
13. Waste & scrap of 
      iron/steel, n.e.s.
14. Fish liver oils &    
      fractions
15. Waste & scrap 
of primary cells/
batteries...
16. Essential oils
17. Rock lobster & sea 
crawfish, frozen
18. Raw hides & skins, 
fresh , or current, n.e.s.
19. Sheep carcasses, frozen
20. Turbopropellers of 
power >1.100kW
=== PAGE 39 ===
|  17  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
The livestock sector, while resilient, is primarily subsistence based and exceptionally 
vulnerable to external shocks. Partly as a consequence of the mobility that characterizes 
livestock and the cross-border familial relations of herders, the sector has navigated risky 
environments, from policy shifts and climate shocks to insecurity and state fragility.23 
While the last livestock census in Somalia was undertaken in 1975,24  estimates suggest 
that the total stock of camels and cattle has grown since it dipped during the civil war.25 
Similarly, mirror trade statistics suggest that livestock has been the primary export in 
Somalia for most years of recent decades. However, given the marginal conditions for 
agricultural production in the country, the livestock value chain is composed primarily of 
subsistence nomadic and agro-pastoralism aimed at subsistence. Livestock yields are thus 
unpredictable and low, and livestock morbidity tends to be high.26 Livestock value chains 
are also unproductive and characterized by low value addition. There are a few developing 
commercial meat-processing facilities and commercial milk production businesses, but 
most meat is processed by households, and milk is generally not processed or packaged.27 
Margins are also often low for pastoral producers, as excessive intermediaries diminish 
profitability significantly because of poor integration of pastoral producers into markets,28 
multiple tax-claiming authorities,29 and the control of a significant proportion of livestock 
exports by oligopolies in specific regions.30 In this context, livestock sector ventures 
in Somalia are often low income generating, and a large proportion of the population 
involved in the sector suffers from extreme poverty.31 There are also substantial gender 
disparities in the sector.32 Furthermore, the livestock value chain remains exceptionally 
precarious because of erratic rainfall, sporadic livestock bans by trading partners (for 
instance, the bans by Gulf states in 1998 and 200033), an increasingly threatened viability 
of current pastoral systems due to land degradation, and a wide range of climate change-
induced factors (box 2.1).
The crop sector is underutilized and highly vulnerable. While the conditions for 
commercial farming in Somalia are marginal,34 some of its regions boast fertile alluvial 
soils capable of producing staple cereals, oil seeds, legumes, and horticultural crops. 
Somalia was once the world’s leading producer and exporter of some crops before the 
civil war, with crop products being the country’s second-largest contributor to GDP and 
exports.35 However, this trend has changed significantly in recent years. While farming 
continues to be an important source of livelihoods, especially for rural populations, 
both rain-fed and irrigation farming have deteriorated significantly.36 Fields have been 
abandoned because of security issues, and crops have been affected by deteriorating 
water infrastructure, poor access to quality inputs, widespread use of low-yielding 
varieties, poor farming techniques, lack of access to markets and inputs, and almost 
nonexistent extension and research services. Climate change has exacerbated the 
vulnerability of crop production (box 2.1). As a consequence of all these factors, crop 
production in Somalia has declined considerably, with a 66 percent decrease in cereal 
production per capita between 1972 and 2012.37 Relatedly, the country’s primary crops 
(such as maize and sorghum) have long-term average yields of 0.5 and 0.3 metric tons 
per hectare, respectively,38 which are extremely low compared with those of other 
countries in the region.39 Even levels of production of the few crops for which Somalia’s 
yields are in line with those of comparators (for example, sesame) remain low against 
their potential.40 As such, Somalia is largely unable to supply food demand within the 
country,41 and the revenues and job generation of the sector remain very depressed, 
despite ongoing initiatives to support their development and some investments in recent 
decades.42 Small-scale subsistence farmers in Somalia,43 who are responsible for the 
majority of crop production, face persistent poverty and struggle to improve production 
and modernize their farming practices, with women being particularly disadvantaged.
=== PAGE 40 ===
|  18  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
BOX 2.1 THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE-INDUCED SHOCKS ON SOMALI PRODUCTIVE SECTORS
Livestock, agriculture, and fisheries in Somalia 
are severely affected by frequent climate shocks. 
According to the Notre Dame Global Adaptation 
Initiative, Somalia is not only the second-most climate 
change-vulnerable country in the world, but also the 
least prepared for it.a Accordingly, the livestock and 
crop sectors have faced a rapid decline in production 
because of increasingly erratic and unreliable annual 
precipitation and a shortening of historical cycles of 
recurrent droughts. According to the FAO, Somalia has 
faced climate shocks for eight agricultural seasons since 
2016, with each of these shocks having considerable 
economic impacts. For instance, the drought in 2016–17 
caused estimated losses of US$2 billionb and led to 
the internal displacement of about 444,000 Somalis.c 
Impacts have also become more drastic in recent years 
because of climate change. For instance: (a) livestock 
mortality has increased by around 30 percent as a 
result of increased drought conditions;d (b) heat stress 
has decreased livestock productivity through reduced 
food intake, weight loss, less likelihood of survival, and 
a reduction in fertility;e (c) rising temperatures and 
changes in runoff patterns compromise not only the 
future yield of groundwater and shallow water,f but 
also the quantity and quality of forageg as well as the 
number of pests and diseases in the livestock sector.h 
The crop sector is similarly affected, with rising 
temperatures causing greater evapotranspiration 
and increased incidence of crop pests and diseasesi 
and drought- and flood-related shocks, leading to 
increased failure of crops. For instance, the Somalia 
Agriculture Technical Group estimates that grain 
losses due to climate change in Southern Somalia are 
more than 20–30 percent of total harvest volumes.j 
Additionally, fishery ecosystems and stocks are 
increasingly being affected, with marine habitats 
that are critical as breeding and nursery grounds (for 
example, corals, seagrass beds, and mangroves) being 
modified and reduced by the degradation of Somalia’s 
marine and coastal environment from acidification, 
sea level rise, higher water temperatures, and changes 
in ocean currents.k 
a. Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN), “Country Rankings: Vulnerability and Readiness,” https://gain.nd.edu/. 
b. World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government—Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022).
c. Gianni Zanini et al., Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia, vol. 1, Main Report (English) (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2018).
d. World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2023).
e. World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review. 
f. Hüseyin Gökçekuş, Youssef Kassem, and Abdifatah Mohamoud Yusuf, “Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources in 
Somalia,” International Research Journal of Engineering & Technology (IRJET) 09, no. 02 (2022), https://www.irjet.net/archives/
V9/i2/IRJET-V9I240.pdf.
g. For more information on this topic, see World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review. 
h. World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review. 
i. Katy Richardson et al., Climate Risk Report for the East Africa Region (Exeter, UK: Met Office, Overseas Development Institute, 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, 2022).
j. World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review. 
k. World Bank, Somalia Climate Risk Review.
=== PAGE 41 ===
|  19  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
Despite its potential, the contribution of the Somali fisheries sector to the economy 
remains modest. Somalia has the longest coastline in Africa (3,330 kilometers) and 
an exclusive economic zone44 of 830,390 square kilometers. Furthermore, while the 
country has a relatively narrow shelf area in most of its coastline and climate risks on 
the country’s marine and coastal environment are prevalent (box 2.1), Somalia has one 
of the strongest upwelling systems in the world, which increases the productivity of 
fishery resources in Somali waters. Although there are significant qualitative information 
limitations in this sector, some assessments suggest a sustainable annual catch potential 
of more than 300,000 tons.45 This includes sizable high-value fishery products (for 
example, lobster, sea cucumber, tuna, and tuna-like species). Fisheries production in 
Somali waters expanded until 2007, when it dropped after the outbreak of piracy. In 
recent years, production has been estimated to be around 140,000 tons per year, with 
60 percent done by industrial vessels (largely foreign and some illegally fishing) and 40 
percent done by domestic fisheries.46 Despite its growth potential, the fisheries sector 
fails to contribute significantly to the Somali economy and livelihoods, with one of the 
lowest fish consumption levels in Africa (3.3 kilograms per capita in 2014) and fishery 
exports in 2021 of only US$25 million.47 Most fishing in the country is artisanal and 
carried out by coastal communities through either subsistence (nonmarketed) fishing 
or full-time and seasonal small-scale fishing,48 which are characterized by considerable 
capacity challenges.49 Infrastructure constraints (such as scarce cold-chain infrastructure 
and poor beach landing areas) and fragmented distribution also bring about significant 
postharvest losses50 and low value addition to fishery production,51 although some 
private sector entities have made investments in recent years.52 Furthermore, illegal, 
unreported, and unregulated fishing by foreign firms has been rampant for many 
years because of a lack of governance and management in the sector53—especially in 
high-value fisheries products. Difficulties persist despite recent strides to address this 
issue, especially within the new federal architecture, wherein the FGS and FMS jointly 
established responsibilities and revenue sharing in the sector (this led to a new offshore 
licensing system, allowing Somalia to generate over US$3 million in revenue, most of 
which was shared with FMS). Despite this progress and ongoing reforms to develop 
Somali fisheries,54 the sector remains severely underdeveloped.
Because of the subdued state of Somali productive sectors, private sector activity 
is concentrated primarily in commerce and other mostly nontradable services (for 
example, construction, education, health care, electricity, and water supply).55 The 
extent to which Somali markets are underserved in terms of both volume and range 
of products56 continues to generate a cornucopia of highly profitable opportunities 
for importing goods.57 As a result, with a few notable exceptions (such as livestock), 
Somalia depends on imports for most consumable products, including basic 
commodities (for instance, food and fuel) (figure 2.4). Similarly, mostly nontradable 
consumption-driven services, fueled by ODA, remittances, and the return of diaspora 
members, have developed. Accordingly, private sector activity across the country is 
concentrated in commerce and other, mostly nontradable services.58 In rural areas, 69 
percent of employment is in retail, petty trading, and other nontradable services.59 In 
urban areas, retail trade, wholesale trade, and other nontradable services are estimated 
to account for more than 90 percent of jobs.60 This is the case across different types of 
firms in Somalia: (a) retail and other service firms account for 85 percent of established 
urban firms and contribute to 88 percent of jobs in established urban businesses,61 (b) 
82.6 percent of household enterprises are focused on either trading through shops and 
street markets or providing other predominantly nontradable services,62 and (c) petty 
trading, the informal trade of commodities (such as khat), and other related activities 
are the primary source of self-employment for urban residents.63
=== PAGE 42 ===
|  20  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
2.2	 MARKET CAPTURE BY A FEW LARGE CONGLOMERATES
Much of Somalia’s wealth is captured by a few large conglomerates. Influential 
conglomerates that are often formally incorporated outside Somali territory64 while 
operating almost solely in Somalia control most of the profitable markets in the 
country.65 Although economic opportunities in Somalia have increased in recent years, 
conglomerates have captured most of them. For instance, service sectors (such as the 
power sector) often operate as local oligopolies generally dominated by conglomerates,66 
and the import-export sector is controlled by a few firms—a 2018 study concludes that 
fewer than a dozen traders account for more than 50 percent of revenues collected at 
the Mogadishu maritime port.67 
The influence of Somali conglomerates has its origins in distortive policies implemented 
before the civil war. During the final decade of Siyad Barre’s regime, state-imposed price 
controls and foreign currency exchange rates led to a significantly overvalued Somali 
shilling. Consequently, the public found significant incentives to transfer remittances 
through black market channels.68 The situation also motivated the Somali government’s 
endorsement of its franco valuta system, through which the private sector was permitted 
to import commodities as long as the source of foreign exchange for such imports 
remained outside Somalia.69 Only a few businesses were able to benefit from the 
considerable expansion of informal black markets during the 1970s and 1980s to fill 
the void of goods, services, and currencies that resulted from the mounting failure of 
chronically underfinanced public sector monopolies.70 While subsistence-driven ventures 
remained the majority of the country’s subdued productive sectors (for example, 
livestock rearing, agriculture, and fisheries),71 it was businesspeople with access to 
capital in foreign currency who were able to take advantage of the highly profitable 
import-export market.72 These firms also benefited from the virtually tax-free status of 
Somalia during its period of statelessness. Large importers also leveraged the diaspora 
to channel money into Somalia, collecting cash in hard currency from migrants to 
buy products that would be imported and compensating migrants’ relatives in Somali 
shillings at black market rates.73 This practice eventually became a separate business, 
with firms channeling remittances and giving private traders access to foreign exchange 
through traditional hawala systems.74 
Source: 	 Observatory of Economic Complexity.
FIGURE 2.4   SOMALIA IMPORTS BY TYPE OF PRODUCT, 2021 
Total and % of total
Foodstuffs
Animal and vegetable products and by-products
Machines (e.g., electrical machinery)
Textiles
Metals
Others
28%
8%
7%
11%
23%
23%
US$5.08 billion
100%
=== PAGE 43 ===
|  21  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
Larger conglomerates in Somalia have used the liquidity accumulated by the 
aforementioned distortive policies to capture the markets they currently dominate.75 
With roots in the import-export and remittances sectors, most conglomerates established 
financial institutions in a nascent but growing financial sector.76 The enhanced access 
to finance provided by these institutions, and the possibility of controlling flows and 
reflows of funds into and out of Somalia, has maintained the liquidity advantage of 
these conglomerates77 and has been essential in leveraging burgeoning opportunities 
in the country in various other sectors.78 For instance, through a conjunction of their 
investments in the ICT sector and their control of liquidity,79 some conglomerates 
dominate one of the most active mobile money markets in the world.80 They also 
exploited their access to liquidity to do the following: (a) create sprawling operations 
in logistics,81 tourism,82 and energy;83 (b) develop real estate properties, generating 
substantial competition for developers who sometimes get loans from conglomerates’ 
banks;84 and (c) protect their dominance in various markets—for instance, market 
entry to the ICT sector is thought to be currently restricted by cross-subsidization of 
broadband services via conglomerates’ more profitable mobile money businesses.85 
Finally, conglomerates have capitalized on their liquidity to benefit from scale 
advantages86 to dominate the export of the few goods produced by Somalis (such as 
livestock)87 and to become wholesalers of imported goods (for example, food products, 
luxury cars, and construction materials), forcing smaller, less capitalized firms into roles 
as distributors and retailers with less profitability.88 
These conglomerates also leverage their wide-ranging public influence to maintain 
market dominance and crowd out competition. The central role of conglomerates in 
the provision of social services and public goods and the substantial amounts of capital 
they funnel to the public sphere through corporate social responsibility programs89 
have earned them high levels of trust and influence across Somalia.90 Conglomerates 
have often used this position to entrench existing power relations and systems of elite 
codependence.91 While initially involved in the political landscape for territorial control 
of their respective clan lineages, conglomerates gradually expanded their operations and 
authority across Somalia, consolidating oligopolistic and anticompetitive dynamics of 
the sectors they operate in across the country. Conglomerates have been able to develop 
regional monopolies in some markets, benefit from cartelistic behaviors in others, and 
act in ways that often lead to negative externalities (for example, there are only minor 
restrictions for the sale of counterfeit or expired medication or spoiled food staples).92 
This has resulted in a series of market failures, including limited interconnectivity 
between telecommunications companies93 and exorbitant costs for some basic services 
such as electricity.94 
Several nonconglomerate large firms and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) manage to 
thrive, typically by harnessing social and political networks. A few other large companies 
and a number of SMEs operate successfully in a range of sectors that conglomerates have 
been unable to fully capture.95 Some of these sectors (for instance, logistics) are dominated 
by cartels of large firms and SMEs.96 In other sectors, in which barriers of entry are 
relatively low (such as construction97), SMEs exist side by side with larger competitors.98 
Finally, in markets in which low levels of liquidity and international networks are an 
advantage (such as speculation with rising property prices, activities that capture aid rents, 
services aimed at elite segments of the Somali population, or development organizations), 
diaspora SMEs are often successful.99 There are a few large firms and SMEs in the 
country with great profitability100 and productivity levels comparable to benchmarks 
in similar countries.101 However, to attain such success, maintaining insider status both
=== PAGE 44 ===
|  22  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
socially and politically remains crucial. Social networks help minimize security costs and 
streamline business operations, enabling engagement in local markets and facilitating the 
mobilization of capital.102 Additionally, firms frequently require ownership structures that 
mirror the clan composition of specific neighborhoods to enhance company acceptance 
and ensure the likelihood of client payments, while safeguarding their infrastructure.103 
Finally, political connections are a considerable advantage. Although specific benefits are 
exclusive to conglomerates (such as negotiating favorable tax liabilities),104 large firms 
and SMEs with robust political connections benefit from their involvement in networks of 
political clientelism.105 
 2.3	 MISSING MIDDLE OF BUSINESSES IN SOMALIA
Most firms in Somalia remain highly disadvantaged.106 Firms that lack social and political 
networks endure a more burdensome business environment.107 This is particularly 
common for women-owned businesses, which are generally marginalized within existing 
political and clan-based networks, reflecting the patriarchal structure of Somali society 
(box 2.2).108 Formal SMEs often face a greater tax burden109 and face challenges in 
scaling up their operations.110 As a result, only 3.9 and 12.0 percent of established 
SMEs in Mogadishu and Bosaso, respectively, reported purchasing new or used fixed 
assets in the previous 12 months,111 falling significantly below their regional peers (42.8 
percent of firms in the Democratic Republic of Congo, 39.5 percent of firms in Djibouti, 
and 33.8 percent of firms in Kenya, among other comparable regions, reported similar 
investments).112 Similarly, only 8.3 percent of established microfirms in those cities 
purchased any kind of machinery or equipment during that period.113 In this context, 
various assessments indicate a high rate of failure among medium firms.114
Businesses in Somalia are thus usually small and informal. There is a missing middle 
in Somalia, with SMEs accounting for almost 6 percent of established businesses (or 
around 2.4 percent of total employment).115 Conversely, it is estimated that almost 94 
percent of nonagricultural firms in Mogadishu and Bosaso are micro.116 Microbusinesses 
are also largely necessity driven. Almost two-thirds of the microbusiness owners 
examined in the 2019 World Bank Micro Enterprise Survey started their business 
because they were unable to find another source of income, wanted to supplement 
with a secondary source of income, or simply found that their business would be more 
convenient in terms of location or hours. Most Somali firms are also informal. Two-
thirds of firms in Bosaso and Mogadishu are informal,117 with an even larger proportion 
of firms likely being informal in rural areas.118 Established businesses are assessed as 
accounting for only 1 in every 15 jobs in the country.119 It is self-employment and HH 
enterprises that provide employment and livelihoods to most Somalis. Self-employment 
accounts for about two-thirds of the country’s active labor force,120 and HH enterprises 
account for about 26 percent of jobs. The percentage of informal jobs in Somalia is 
91.7 (figure 2.5). This approximation is consistent with calculations by ILO and IMF 
of informal employment in Somalia that estimate informality at levels that are slightly 
different but also above 91 percent.121
=== PAGE 45 ===
|  23  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
This context adversely affects job creation and the overall productivity of the Somali 
private sector. Somali necessity-driven ventures generate few jobs. Apart from the large 
proportion of self-employment in the country, HH enterprises consist mostly of firms 
with one or two employees,122 and microbusinesses have an average of two employees.123 
Similarly, while statistics for the productivity of the self-employed are unavailable, 
available data indicate that HH enterprises, established informal businesses, and 
established micro formal businesses have productivities that are considerably lower than 
those of larger formal businesses (figure 2.6) and much lower than those of the same 
type of firms in comparator countries.124 
12.1
34.5
73.3
91.7
Average low 
informality 
countries
Average medium 
informality 
countries
Average high 
informality 
countries
Somalia
Sources: 	International Labour Organization Database (ILOSTAT); ILO estimates; and IMF staff 
calculations in Roberto Cardarelli et al., “Informality, Development, and the Business 
Cycle in North Africa” (Developmental Paper 2022/011, IMF, Washington, DC, 2022). 
FIGURE 2.5 INFORMAL EMPLOYMENT IN WORLD COUNTRIES AS A GROUP 
AND IN SOMALIA, 2022 
% of total employment
Sources: 	World Bank staff calculations based on 2012 Somaliland Enterprise Survey and 2019 
Mogadishu/Bosaso Enterprise Survey.
Note: 	
* = firms with at least 100 employees. 
2.51
4.78
9.55
7.96
26.16
Household 
enterprises 
(urban only)
Non-established 
informal 
businesses
Established 
informal 
businesses
Established 
formal micro 
businesses
Established  
larger formal 
business*
FIGURE 2.6 MEDIAN DAILY SALES PER WORKER IN DIFFERENT TYPES  
OF FIRMS BASED ON 2012 AND 2019 DATA 
% of total employment
=== PAGE 46 ===
|  24  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
BOX 2.2 WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESSES IN SOMALIA
Women-led businesses in Somalia tend to be more 
necessity driven and have lower productivity than 
men-led businesses. As women face higher levels of 
underemployment and are less likely to find jobs that 
earn a regular wage or salary,a they are more prone 
to start businesses because of economic push factors. 
Many women also require the flexibility of micro- and 
small-business ownership to balance their domestic 
and caregiving responsibilities. Basically, three-
quarters of the women in the Somali labor force are 
self-employed,b with recent evidence suggesting that 
70 percent of petty traders are women.c More than 
half of all HH enterprises are also owned by women. 
Female entrepreneurial ventures are also more typically 
micro than both male-led ventures in Somalia and 
female-led ventures in other countries.d According to 
the 2019 World Bank Enterprise Survey in Mogadishu 
and Bosaso, women own a smaller proportion of 
larger formal businesses, with only 9 percent of 
nonmicro formal businesses being owned by women. 
Furthermore, the productivity of women businesses 
is lower, as they have lower revenues than similar 
male-led businessese and are largely excluded from 
high-earning segments of value chains.f In addition, 
they are constrained by the following: (a) Issues 
with mobility, which are linked to women’s social 
responsibilities assigned by entrenched social norms.g 
(b) Less access to capital, which is linked especially 
to issues with a lack of collateral, due to restrictions 
on women’s inheritance and ownership enshrined 
in customary legal systems and discriminatory 
practices in the Somali rental market. This leads to 
a particularly strong reliance on informal sources 
of credit (friends, family, and saving groups), which 
generally offer small loans with high transaction costs. 
(c) More limited social and political networks (where 
information about trading practices is shared), due 
primarily to marginalization of women in existing clan 
structures. The lower productivity and job generation 
of women-led businesses constrain female labor force 
participation, as women entrepreneurs are more 
likely to hire women than their male counterparts, 
contributing most to employment of women.h 
a. World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2020).
b. 	Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank, 2021).
c. 	World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum—Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
d. 	World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
e. 	For instance, according to the 2021 Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, women-led household enterprise revenues are 
40 percent lower than those of similar businesses led by men.
f. 	 For example, women are excluded from catching and exporting fish, trekking with animals in search of higher market 
prices, agricultural value chains with the greatest volumes, and currency exchange.
g. 	World Bank, Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, 2019).
h. 	In Somalia, women’s ownership of household enterprises contributes to one in four jobs for other women. See World 
Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
=== PAGE 47 ===
|  25  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
2.4	 LOW ECONOMIC INTEGRATION AND THE MINIMAL  
COMPLEXITY OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
The economic integration of the Somali private sector is minimal internationally and 
domestically. While official trade statistics severely underestimate trade in Somalia, 
with cross-border trade being one of the key sources of employment generation in 
the country125 (especially in the regions bordering Ethiopia and Kenya), Somalia’s 
integration into the regional and global economy is minimal. Although Somalia has 
become increasingly integrated with the economies of Gulf states, Türkiye, and the 
East African region, its exports have shown limited foreign value added and low 
participation as intermediate inputs in the exports of other countries. As a result, 
Somalia’s backward and forward linkages to global value chains continue to be 
limited,126 given the notable geographic and economic fragmentation that defines 
Somalia’s private sector. The nation exhibits the highest within-country price differential 
in the region, even after transportation and transaction costs are factored in (figure 
2.7).127 Fragmentation is particularly pronounced along corridors originating from 
the port of Mogadishu, yet it pervades all of Somalia’s domestic markets, amplifying 
producer costs and complicating local competition with imports. This also poses 
challenges for the private sector to compete as exporters in foreign markets.128
Source: 	 Habtamu Tesfaye Edjigu, Market Accessibility, Food Prices and Market Integration in Horn of 
Africa (self-published, 2021), mimeo.com. 
14.68
1.66
1.12
1.08 1.36
0.53 0.30 0.46 1.28
2.67
4.70
7.18
9.99
1.04
11.1811.48
Travel time 
(Hours)
Mean
Standard 
deviation
Maximum- 
minimum
FIGURE 2.7 SUMMARY STATISTICS OF WITHIN-COUNTRY PRICE  
DIFFERENTIALS, 2021 
Djibouti        Ethiopia        Kenya        Somalia
Index—price
=== PAGE 48 ===
|  26  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
While FDI in Somalia appears to be sizable as a proportion of GDP, it has not 
contributed to the country’s diversification into higher-valued-added products. 
Statistics suggest that FDI as a percentage of GDP in Somalia is much higher than 
averages for Sub-Saharan African and FCV countries (figure 3.8).129 Accordingly, 
FDI stocks are estimated to have increased significantly in recent years.130 However, 
on a per capita basis, FDI in the country remains small. The share of FDI that is 
efficiency seeking is also negligible. There have been a few investments in ports and 
airports by Turkish and Emirati corporations such as Favori, Albayrak Group, and DP 
World131 and some investment by small foreign firms in other economic sectors,132 but 
FDI in the country has been driven primarily by diaspora and Somali transnational 
conglomerate investments, as the absence of effective regulation, in conjunction with 
other cross-cutting constraints in Somalia, limits efficiency-seeking FDI in the country. 
With respect to diaspora investments, many Somalis abroad have taken steps in recent 
decades to re-engage with their country of origin in ways that go beyond traditional 
remittances. Reportedly, 60 percent of Somali diaspora members are active investors in 
the country.133 Thus, although most diaspora investments are between US$5,000 and 
US$50,000,134 some reports calculate that the sum of diaspora investments is several 
hundred million US dollars per year,135 which accounts for a large proportion of the 
total estimated FDI in the country.136 However, diaspora investments have largely been 
unable to stimulate economic development, as they are primarily funneled into low-
impact sectors like shops, cafes, and land.137 With respect to investments from Somali 
conglomerates, although there are no statistics on their exact size, they are estimated to 
be large, given the growth of these firms in various markets.
700
600
500
400
300
200
Sources: 	International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics and Balance of Payments 
databases, World Bank, International Debt Statistics, and World Bank and OECD GDP 
estimates, supplemented by data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development and official national sources, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook and 
data files.
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product; FCV = fragile, conflict, violence.
FIGURE 2.8   FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (NET INFLOWS) IN SOMALIA, 
2013–22  
2013	
2014	
2015	
2016	
2017	
2018	
2019	
2020	
2021	
   2022
 % of GDP
258
261
303
330
369
408
447
534
601
636
Somalia (% GDP)                                                     FCV countries (%GDP) 
Sub-Saharan Africa (% GDP)                               Somalia (Million US$)
=== PAGE 49 ===
|  27  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
1.	
Jamil A. Mubarak, “The ‘Hidden Hand’ behind the Resilience of the Stateless Economy of Somalia,” World Development 25, no. 12 
(1997): 2027–41.
2.	
According to IMF’s 2022 Article IV Consultation, government expenditure was only 6.9 percent of GDP in 2022 in Somalia.
3.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
4.	
Jos Meester, Ana Uzelac, and Claire Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia: Blue Desert Strategy” (Clingendael Institute, The 
Hague, the Netherlands, 2019).
5.	
For further discussion, see Alex de Waal, Famine Crimes: Politics and the Disaster Relief Industry in Africa (Oxford, UK: James 
Currey Ltd., 1997). 
6.	
Stakeholder consultations in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023, and various secondary sources (for example, Meester, 
Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia”; and Tobias Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities: Urbanization and 
Public Goods in Somalia” [Rift Valley Institute, Nairobi, Kenya, 2020]). 
7.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
8.	
For more information, see Sherine El Taraboulsi-McCarthy, Nisar Majid, and Barnaby Willitts-King, “Private Sector 
Engagement in Complex Emergencies: Case Studies from Yemen and Southern Somalia” (ODI [Overseas Development 
Institute], London, February 2017); and Yusuf Nur, “The Business-Government Partnership Way to Economic Development in 
Somalia,” in Theorizing Somali Society: Hope, Transformation and Development, ed. Abdulkadir Osman Farah and Mohamed A. Eno 
(New Delhi, India: Authorspress, 2022), 150–66.
9.	
For a reference, see Stig Jarle Hansen, “Civil War Economies, the Hunt for Profit and the Incentives for Peace (The Case of 
Somalia)” (AE Working Paper 1, University of Bath, UK, 2007).
10.	
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Report: Somalia (Nairobi, Kenya: UNDP, 1998). 
11.	
Some reports state that investments in light manufacturing expanded in larger Somali cities (such as Hargeisa, Mogadishu, 
and Bosaso) even during the country’s period of statelessness (see, for instance, UNDP, Human Development Report 2001—
Somalia [New York: UNDP, 2001]). Some multinationals have opened factories in Somalia through local agents (for example, 
Coca-Cola; see Mark Tran, ”Somaliland Bottles Its Hopes in Coca-Cola Plant,” the Guardian, July 20, 2012; A. Ali, “Coke Plant Heralds 
New Beginning in Somalia,” African Business Journal, August-September 2004; and “Coca-Cola Plant Resumes Its Production 
in Somalia,” Shabelle Media Network, December 11, 2012). Finally, some development partners have implemented projects to 
support the development of manufacturing firms (especially in agribusiness value chains).
12.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
13.	
Estimated using World Bank staff calculations of the contributions of different types of businesses to employment from the 
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
14.	
According to the World Bank 2022 Somalia Household Survey, 2.4 percent of household businesses processed purchased 
crops or livestock products for sale. 
15.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
16.	
According to consultations with private and public sector stakeholders, gold is mostly reexported after being informally 
imported in Somalia.
17.	
Source: Observatory of Economic Complexity.
18.	
For example, diversification of economic activities or splitting of herds.
19.	
Ken Menkhaus, Trends in Somali Society, Governance, Environment, and Transnational Relations: An Introduction and Synthesis 
(Nairobi, Kenya: Rift Valley Institute, January 2021).
20.	
See, for instance, International Labor Organization (ILO), Somalia Labor Force Survey (Geneva, Switzerland: ILO, 2014).
21.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
22.	
Gianni Zanini et al., Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, volume 1: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia 
(Washington, DC: World Bank and FAO, 2018), https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/781281522164647812/pdf/124651-
REVISED-Somalia-CEM-Agriculture-Report-Main-Report-Revised-July-2018.pdf; and FAO, “National Gender Profile of 
Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods: Somalia” (FAO, Mogadishu, Somalia, 2021), https://www.fao.org/3/cb6316en/cb6316en.pdf. 
23.	
Little, Somalia: Economy without State.
24.	
A livestock census supported by development institutions is planned for 2024.
25.	
See FAOSTAT, FAO Crops and Livestock Products data.
26.	
Zanini et al., Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia.
27.	
Dalberg, “Mapping and Analysis of Value Chains in Somaliland—Livestock and Beverages,” internal document, March 2017; 
and stakeholder consultations in Mogadishu, January 2023.
Notes
=== PAGE 50 ===
|  28  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
28.	
Ong’ao Ng'asike, Tobias Hagmann, and Oliver V. Wasonga, “Brokerage in the Borderlands: The Political Economy of Livestock 
Intermediaries in Northern Kenya,” Journal of Eastern African Studies 15, no. 1 (2021): 168–88, https://doi.org/10.1080/17531055.20
20.1845041.
29.	
Ahmed M. Musa, Finn Stepputat, and Tobias Hagmann, “Revenues on the Hoof: Livestock Trade, Taxation and State-Making in 
the Somali Territories,” Journal of Eastern African Studies 15, no. 1 (2021): 108–27, https://doi.org/10.1080/17531055.2020.1834306.
30.	
Ahmed Musa, “From Trust to Oligopoly: Institutional Change in Livestock Trade in Somaliland after 1991” (Working Paper 
2019:8, Danish Institute for International Studies, Copenhagen, Denmark, August 2019); and Nisar Majid, “Livestock Trade in 
the Djibouti, Somali and Ethiopian Borderlands” (Briefing paper, Chatham House, London, September 2010). 
31.	
Sonia Plaza and Caroline Cerruti, “How Drought Insurance and Value Chains Can Support Somalia’s Livestock Economy,” 
World Bank Blogs, October 3, 2022, https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/how-drought-insurance-and-value-chains- 
can-support-somalias-livestock-economy.
32.	
For more information, see FAO, “National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods: Somalia.”
33.	
Mark Bradbury, Ken Menkhaus, and Roland Marchal, Human Development Report: Somalia, 2001 (Nairobi, Kenya: UNDP [United 
Nations Development Programme], 2001); and data from the Observatory of Economic Complexity, https://oec.world/
en/profile/country/som. For an explanation of the impact to the livestock sector of Somalia’s institutional and regulatory 
deficiencies, see Musa, “From Trust to Oligopoly.”
34.	
Less than 5 percent of the Somali territory is suitable for cultivation. Furthermore, only 25 percent of the Somali territory 
than can be cultivated is suitable for irrigation. For more information, see Albert Tuinhof et al., Economics of Water: 
Digging for Data in Somalia—Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or Enabling Factor for Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021); Mark Kipkurwa Boitt, Flomena C. Langat, and John K. Kapoi, “Geospatial Agro-climatic 
Characterization for Assessment of Potential Agricultural Areas in Somalia, Africa,” Journal of Agricultural Informatics 9, no. 3 
(2018): 18–35, https://doi.org/10.17700/jai.2018.9.3.479; and Federal Republic of Somalia, “National Adaptation Programme of 
Action on Climate Change” (UNDP, April 2013).
35.	
Zanini et al., Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture. 
36.	
Rain-fed farming accounts for 90 percent of the total cultivated area in Somalia, with irrigated farming accounting for the rest.
37.	
Bryan Keogh, “Somalia Is Facing Another Food Crisis: Here’s Why—And What Can Be Done to Stop the Cycle,” The 
Conversation, April 29, 2021.
38.	
World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government—Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022).
39.	
For instance, FAOSTAT data for 2015–19 point to average sorghum yields of 2.59 metric tons per hectare (MT/ha)] in Ethiopia, 
0.98 MT/ha in Mali, and 0.97 MT/ha in Uganda.
40.	
Zanini et al., Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture.
41.	
Daniel Maxwell and Merry Fitzpatrick, “The 2011 Somalia Famine: Context, Causes and Complications,” Global Food Security 
1, no. 1 (2012): 5–12. A widening gap between food production and consumption exists, with local crop production unable to 
supply even half of its per capita cereal needs. 
42.	
For instance, the World Bank Barwaaqo project. 
43.	
Little, Somalia: Economy without State; and Carl Collen, “Del Monte Reveals Somalia Banana Partnership,” Eurofruit, February 2, 
2023, https://www.fruitnet.com/eurofruit/del-monte-reveals-somalia-banana-partnership/248235.article.
44.	
An exclusive economic zone is the area of 200-mile territorial sea of a country beyond and adjacent to its territorial sea (as 
prescribed by the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea).
45.	
For more information, see World Bank, “Somalia: Support to the Fisheries Sector and Reconstructing Coastal Livelihoods” 
(Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC, June 2016).
46.	
Sea Around Us project, consulted August 2023, https://www.seaaroundus.org/. 
47.	
Observatory of Economic Complexity, accessed on July 18, 2023, https://oec.world/en/profile/country/
som?depthSelector1=HS2Depth.
48.	
For more information, see FAO, “National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihood: Somalia.” 
49.	
Zanini et al., Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia.
50.	
Estimates by FGS’s Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources suggest postharvest losses of around 40 percent.
51.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023.
52.	
For instance, the Habo Tuna factory improved its cold-chain infrastructure with support from development partners.
53.	
Jay Bahadur, “Fishy Business: Illegal Fishing in Somalia and the Capture of State Institutions” (Research report, Global 
Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, Geneva, Switzerland, 2021).
=== PAGE 51 ===
|  29  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
54.	
The Ministry of Fisheries and Blue Economy enacted a Federal Fisheries Act in March 2023. In April 2023, implementing 
regulations that frame the scope of activities in Somalia’s Fisheries Exclusive Zone through clear terms and conditions were 
issued. The World Bank, EU, FAO/Italian Cooperation, US Agency for International Development, and Deutsche Gesellschaft 
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) are currently leading projects in the sector.
55.	
There are a few exceptions of tradable services that developed (such as in ICT), but they are also largely consumption driven.
56.	
Jos Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets—A Political-Economic Perspective on SMEs in the Somali Private 
Sector under COVID-19,” Clingendael Magazine online report, clingendael.org.
57.	
Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets.”
58.	
African Solar Designs, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia,” 2017, africansolardesigns.com.
59.	
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
60.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
61.	
World Bank staff calculations using the 2019 Enterprise and Micro Surveys in Mogadishu and Bosaso. 
62.	
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 2023. 
63.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2020). Small-
scale retail and trade are the main source of income and employment especially for women, because of the lack of other 
viable alternatives, as well as the flexibility it offers in terms of balancing domestic and caregiving responsibilities.
64.	
For instance, Hormuud is based in Doha, Qatar, and Dahabshiil was incorporated in the United Kingdom and is 
headquartered in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. 
65.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.”
66.	
Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities”; UNICON Power Master Plan—Development of a Power Master Plan for Somali 
Project, October 2018; and consultations with private sector stakeholders in Hargeisa and Mogadishu, December 2022 and 
January 2023.
67.	
Thomas Cantens, “An Assessment of Somalia Customs Revenue Potential: A Way Forward for Customs Reforms,” informal 
report, 2018. 
68.	
Hansen, “Civil War Economies.”
69.	
For more information, see Jamil Mubarak, From Bad Policy to Chaos in Somalia: How an Economy Fell Apart (Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 1996).
70.	
Mubarak, “The ‘Hidden Hand’ behind the Resilience.”
71.	
Vali Jamal, “Somalia: Understanding an Unconventional Economy,” Development and Change 19, no. 2 (1988): 203–65. 
72.	
Roland Marchal, The Post Civil War Somali Business Class (Nairobi, Kenya: European Commission Somalia Unit, 1996).
73.	
Marchal, A Survey of Mogadishu’s Economy. 
74.	
While hawala can refer to many kinds of informal money-transfer systems that do not involve the physical transfer of cash, 
traditional hawala networks are based on trust, enabling them to function in areas that lack a functioning banking system. 
Customers use brokers based in their respective locations to send and receive money, with the senders paying a small 
commission and the receivers sometimes using a password to release the funds.
75.	
For instance, Dahabshiil and Hormuud—which at present own the two largest constellations of firms in the country—
developed in this manner. For more information on this topic, see Ahmed I. Samatar, “The Making of Dahabshiil: A Brief 
Interview,” Bildhaan: An International Journal of Somali Studies 21 (2021), article 7; and Marchal, A Survey of Mogadishu’s Economy. 
76.	
IMF, “Somalia: Technical Assistance Report—Bank Supervision and Regulation” (IMF Country Report no.21/68, IMF, 
Washington, DC, 2020).
77.	
For more information on this topic, see Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities.”
78.	
Consultations with a foreign private equity fund that is attempting to create a joint venture with a Somali conglomerate 
revealed that Somali conglomerates have no issues with making cash investments of tens of millions of US dollars in the 
country.
79.	
Ali Yassin sheikh Ali and Ismail Sheikh Yusuf Ahmed, “Factors Influencing Mobile Money Transfer Adoption among Somali 
Students,” International Journal of Business, Economics and Law 4, no. 1 (June 2014): 180–88.
80.	
John Randa and Benjamin Thilasoni, “Rapid Growth in Mobile Money: Stability or Vulnerability?” (Somalia Economic Update 
no. 3, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
81.	
This includes logistics of commercial goods but also logistics support for humanitarian actors (for example, overland 
transportation of aid, import of fuel, the provision of private security, and leasing of property to nongovernmental 
organizations and international organizations).
=== PAGE 52 ===
|  30  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
82.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
83.	
In the absence of a physical national grid in the electricity sector, conglomerates have used their liquidity to invest in isolated 
distribution grids in major cities, to which new entrants have no access, and to buy out most competitors in large urban cities 
in an ongoing consolidation of the energy market.
84.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
85.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa” (Initiative DE4A Report, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2022).
86.	
Moving goods in container volumes rather than smaller freights.
87.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023.
88.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
89.	
Taraboulsi-McCarthy, Majid, and Willitts-King, “Private Sector Engagement in Complex Emergencies”; and Nur, “The 
Business-Government Partnership Way.” For instance, conglomerates coordinated considerable relief efforts for the regions 
stricken by recent severe droughts in parallel and sometimes before government initiatives or international aid.
90.	
Shabelle Media Network, “Somalia: Hormud [sic] Telecom’s Response to Bombing Victims Draws Praise,” allAfrica, October 21, 
2017, https://allafrica.com/stories/201710230675.html; and Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
91.	
Ahmed M. Musa and Cindy Horst, “State Formation and Economic Development in Post-war Somaliland: The Impact of 
the Private Sector in an Unrecognized State,” Conflict, Security & Development 19, no. 1 (2019): 35–53; and K. Menkhaus, “Elite 
Bargains and Political Deals Project: Somalia Case Study” (Stabilisation Unit Report, UK Government, 2018). 
92.	
Jillian Clare Kohler et al., “An Examination of Pharmaceutical Systems in Severely Disrupted Countries.” BMC International 
Health and Human Rights 12, article 34 (2012).
93.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa.” 
94.	
UNICON Power Master Plan. 
95.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
96.	
Claire Elder, “Logistics Contracts and the Political Economy of State Failure: Evidence from Somalia,” African Affairs 121, no. 484 
(July 2022): 395–417.
97.	
According to consultations with private sector stakeholders, larger building projects are dominated by a few bigger players. 
However, there are certain types of smaller-scale construction that do not require such advantages, in which SMEs are able 
to survive.
98.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
99.	
Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.” 
100.	 Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
101.	
See results of the latest Enterprise Surveys for Mozambique and Zambia.
102.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
103.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review. 
104.	
Abshir, Abdirahman, and Stogdon, “Tax and the State in Somalia”; and “Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and 
Eritrea Pursuant to Security Council Resolution 2244 (2015): Somalia” (United Nations Security Council, New York, 2016).
105.	
Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Market.”
106.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
107.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; and consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
108.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
109.	
Abshir, Abdirahman, and Stogdon, “Tax and the State in Somalia”; and Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and 
Eritrea.
110.	
Meester et al., “Financial Disruption and Fragile Markets.”
111.	
World Bank Enterprise Survey 2019 done in Mogadishu and Bosaso.
112.	
Latest World Bank Enterprise Surveys for those countries.
113.	
World Bank Micro-Enterprise Survey 2019 done in Mogadishu and Bosaso.
114.	
For instance, Somaliland’s National Industry Association found that more than 70 percent of small and medium registered 
enterprises fail.
=== PAGE 53 ===
|  31  |
	
STATE OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
115.	
World Bank Staff calculations based on the 2019 Enterprise, Informal, and Micro Surveys and on the World Bank 2021 Country 
Economic Memorandum.
116.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2019 Enterprise and Micro Surveys in Mogadishu and Bosaso. There is no uniform 
definition of micro enterprises and SMEs used by the Somali government. Based on World Bank estimates using the 2019 
Enterprise, Micro, and Informal Surveys in Mogadishu and Bosaso, and given the small size of firms in Somalia, this CPSD 
defines micro firms as those with fewer than 5 employees, small firms as those with 5–19 employees, and medium firm as 
those with 20–99 employees. Average numbers of employees for micro and small urban established businesses in Somalia 
are 2 and 8, respectively.
117.	
World Bank calculations for the 2021 Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
118.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023.
119.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
120.	
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor. 
121.	
Roberto Cardarelli et al., “Informality, Development, and the Business Cycle in North Africa” (Departmental paper, IMF, 
Washington, DC, 2022).
122.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2022 Household Survey in Somalia.
123.	
World Bank staff calculations based on the 2019 Enterprise and Micro Surveys in Mogadishu and Bosaso.
124.	
See results of the latest Enterprise Surveys for Mozambique and Zambia.
125.	
As pointed out in the 2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, estimates by development institutions suggest 
that cross-border trade is two to five times higher than official statistics (see, for instance, Afreximbank, African Trade Report 
2020: Informal Cross-Border Trade in Africa in the Context of the AfCFTA (Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt: African Export-Import 
Bank, 2020); and World Bank and UK Department of International Development, Poverty and Vulnerability in the Ethiopian 
Lowlands: Building a More Resilient Future (Washington, DC: 2019). In effect, it is estimated that trading that is composed 
primarily of cross-border trading employs between 10 and 30 percent of the total population.
126.	
Analysis by World Bank staff for 2022 trade assessment.
127.	
As discussed in a recent analysis on spatial differences in domestic prices in the 2021 World Bank Somalia Country Economic 
Memorandum.
128.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
129.	
FDI statistics in Somalia are not entirely reliable; they are calculated as a residual, given the scarcity of data for the country. 
130.	
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), World Investment Report 2023: Investing in Sustainable Energy 
for All (Geneva, Switzerland: UNCTAD, 2023).
131.	
Contemporary Eurasia and Gor Hovhannisyan, “Turkey’s Expansion in Eastern Africa: The Case of Somalia,” International Journal 
of Eurasian Geopolitics 11 (December 2022): 44–57; and Jonas Gerding,“ At Port of Berbera, Dubai Invests in Horn of Africa 
Shipping,” Deutsche Welle, December 26, 2022. 
132.	
It is estimated that US$14.5 million from European firms has been placed in Somalia in recent years. For more information 
on this topic, see European Union, “European Business: How European Investment and Trade Contribute to Sustainable 
Development” (EU, Brussels, Belgium, 2021).
133.	
Jay B. Benson et al., “Somali Diaspora Investment Survey Report: Typologies, Drivers, & Recommendations” (Shuraako 
program of the One Earth Future Foundation, Broomfield, CO, 2016), https://shuraako.org/sites/default/files/SDIS-Survey-
Report.pdf.	
134.	
Benson et al., “Somalia Diaspora Investment Survey Report.” 
135.	
Marcus Manuel et al., “The New Deal in Somalia: An Independent Review of the Somali Compact, 2014–2016” (Overseas 
Development Institute, London, April 2017).
136.	
SOMINVEST, A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment in Somalia’s Energy Sector (Mogadishu: Somalia Investment 
Promotion Office, February 2022). 
  137.	 Meester, Uzelac, and Elder, “Transnational Capital in Somalia.”
=== PAGE 54 ===
|  32  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
	
CROSS-CUTTING  
POLICY CONSTRAINTS 
AFFECTING  
THE BUSINESS  
ENVIRONMENT  
IN SOMALIA 
3.
While good progress is being made across a number of areas, weak institutions for 
the private sector remain a key driver of Somalia's challenging business environment. 
The Somali private sector continues to rely heavily on trust-based informal institutions 
which, while a source of resilience, are often also inefficient and inequitable. Conversely, 
Somalia’s formal institutional and regulatory frameworks lack legitimacy with a large 
number of private sector stakeholders and remain largely ineffective.1 This situation is 
partly a result of Somalia’s remaining governance challenges (figure 3.1), their effect on 
levels of corruption, and the prevalence of alternative governance arrangements in the 
country—all of which are largely related to broader political dynamics whose incidence 
remains linked to Somalia’s state- building process.2 However, private sector institutions 
are eager for more stability and predictability,3 and thus maintain that they are looking 
for a more developed and effective formal institutional and regulatory framework. 
Policy reform processes in Somalia can be drawn out, noninclusive and nonlinear, given 
scarce trust among Somali social groups and with major political institutions, and due 
to the government’s limited enforcement capacity and the considerable power of some 
private sector firms that have vested interests with government entities. In this context, 
the country’s weak public-private dialogue (PPD) mechanisms need to be improved to 
attempt enhancing stakeholder buy-in for institutional and regulatory reforms, and to 
gradually restore social capital and trust.4 
This chapter focuses on discussing the cross-cutting constraints that are key in 
explaining the institutional and regulatory fragility of Somalia’s framework for private 
sector development, organizing them around five key areas: (a) incomplete formal 
institutional, legal, and regulatory frameworks; (b) resulting prevalence of informal 
institutions; (c) enduring impacts of corruption; (d) competing alternative governance 
arrangements; and (e) the lack of an effective and inclusive national PPD mechanism 
to ensure more effective, inclusive, and efficient reform processes. These mutually 
reinforcing areas are prioritized because of the importance of resolving them to improve 
the business environment in Somalia.
=== PAGE 55 ===
|  33  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
3.1	
DEFICIENT FORMAL INSTITUTIONAL AND REGULATORY 
FRAMEWORKS 
Although several foundational steps have been taken to develop formal institutional 
and regulatory frameworks for the private sector, gaps remain. In 2019, in a major 
milestone, FGS enacted a Company Act. Furthermore, progress has been made in the 
development of the regulatory and institutional frameworks for investment policy 
and promotion (IPP); public-private partnerships (PPP); trade, quality standards, and 
infrastructure; tax regulation; and a national ID. A series of policies for private sector 
development have also been drafted and approved.5 These steps have been foundational 
for Somalia, because they represent the critical building blocks for improving the 
business environment in the country. The financial sector institutional and regulatory 
frameworks have also made remarkable progress, which will be discussed in the deep 
dive assessment of that sector (chapter 5). In this context, a recent survey of firms 
considering investments in the Somali market found that 56 percent of firms indicated 
that the formal institutional and regulatory framework in the country has become less 
difficult in recent years.6 However, firms still find the formal institutional and regulatory 
framework to be a primary impediment to private sector activity in the country for 
a range of reasons.7 However, firms still find the formal institutional and regulatory 
framework to be a primary impediment to private sector activity in the country for a 
range of reasons, including issues with the unfinished political settlement between FGS 
and FMS. There are also many areas in which regulatory and institutional frameworks 
for the private sector remain practically absent (such as in competition), a series of gaps 
in the laws and regulations that have been developed, and capacity constraints in most 
institutions for private sector development. Finally, the enforcement of regulations is 
often ineffective due to government constraints and private sector vested interests. These 
advances and deficiencies will be discussed in more detail in the following paragraphs.
Source: 	 World Bank World Governance Indicators, 2022.
Notes: 	
Higher rank denotes greater success with the indicator; FCV = fragility, conflict, and 
violence. 
Voice and 
accountability
Political 
stability
Government 
effectiveness
Regulatory 
quality
Rule of law
Control of 
corruption
FIGURE 3.1  WORLD GOVERNANCE INDICATORS:  
SOMALIA VS. SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA AND FCV COMPARATORS, 2022 
40
30
20
10
0
Percentile rank among all countries in the world, %
Somalia        Sudan        Afghanistan        Congo, Dem. Rep.        Sub-Saharan Africa
=== PAGE 56 ===
|  34  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Business entry, exit, and corporate governance
FGS’s progress with the 2019 Company Act and related regulations has been 
transformative for Somalia, but much remains to be done. The 2019 Company Act (and 
its amendment in 2022) updated pre-1991 legislation in Somalia to provide a regulatory 
basis for starting a company and for shareholder rights, responsibilities of directors, 
dissolution of firms, and financial and operational reporting requirements by companies. 
The enactment of this law and regulations has been fundamental to initiating a transition 
from a state of affairs characterized by a vacuum of formal regulations and institutions 
for private sector development, to a situation in which the private sector can leverage 
these regulations and institutions to grow inclusively. But much remains to be done to 
fill the remaining gaps. For instance, the framework does not account for bankruptcies 
in any way. Perhaps more importantly, the Company Act and related regulations are not 
yet always implemented efficiently at the federal level, and even less so at the FMS level, 
partly due to capacity challenges at Somali institutions for private sector development.
Reforms to business registry processes have progressed particularly well in Somalia, 
although they need to improve further. The FGS has transitioned from a situation in 
which private sector entities relied on the 1974 civil code, which had no process for 
business registration, to one in which registration processes are relatively streamlined. The 
new online business registration system at MoCI is making the business registry process 
easier, faster, and more transparent—not only because business operators no longer 
need to commute to a MoCI office, but also because the business registry process to 
incorporate a business now takes only about 23 hours. The timelines for other processes 
also have been condensed. Despite this remarkable progress, many issues related to 
business entry remain unaddressed in Somalia. Specifically, these include the following: (a) 
Registration and licensing fees remain a considerable proportion of the per capita GDP 
in the country. (b) Some of the provisions in the 2019 Company Act are still not being 
enforced by FMS because mandates related to harmonization of business licensing and 
revenue sharing remain unclear. As such, there continues to be a duplication of records 
across FGS, FMS, and municipalities. (c) A unified business registration regime covering 
FGS and all FMS—which could support business registry data sharing and facilitate know 
your customer (KYC) requirements—does not exist. (d) Processes for business licenses, 
permits, and other post-registration procedures remain fragmented.
Investment policy and promotion
Several reforms have been realized in the past decade to improve Somalia’s institutional 
and regulatory framework for investment policy and promotion. Since 2015, the Somali 
Foreign Investment Law unambiguously recognized foreign investors and their right 
to register investments approved by the Somali government. The Foreign Investment 
Board was also formed in that year as the highest investment policy-making body 
in the country, and the Somali Investment Promotion Office (SOMINVEST) was 
created as the country’s national investment promotion agency (under the Federal 
Ministry of Planning, Investment, and Economic Development). Since then, several 
additional steps have been taken to enhance SOMINVEST’s ability to promote FDI and 
facilitate investment entry and retention. A National Investment Promotion Strategy
=== PAGE 57 ===
|  35  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
was developed in 2020, a decree was issued that year by the Prime Minister’s office 
to expand SOMINVEST’s role, an Investment Agency Promotion Bill was drafted to 
increase SOMINVEST’s independence and better delineate its role (which is under 
review by the Somali Parliament8), and a collaboration framework was signed in 
2021 by FGS and FMS to facilitate the coordination between SOMINVEST and FMS 
Investment Coordination offices. These steps have enabled investment promotion 
institutions in Somalia to host a series of outreach events and to start working with 
the private sector to navigate investment entry and establishment requirements.9 Laws 
establishing special economic zones have also been enacted for specific regions in 
Somalia.10 Finally, an Investor and Investments Protection Act (IIPA) was enacted in 
March 2023, complementing the investment protection provisions in the 2015 Foreign 
Investment Law, improving some standards of treatment for investors, providing 
guarantees against unlawful expropriation, and allowing for the free transfer of funds.
However, several constraints to FDI are still prevalent in the country. First, foreign 
investors continue to face a series of market access restrictions. While it is clearly defined 
that certain economic sectors (such as minerals and extractives, military manufacturing) 
are regulated not by Somalia’s investment laws but rather by its Mining Code and 
Mining Regulations, there is still no transparent framework to determine in which 
sectors foreign investment is restricted or limited. For example, there are limitations to 
foreign investor market access in the services sector.11 Furthermore, the screening and 
approval mechanism for investments entering the country is also discriminatory and not 
aligned with international best practices. For example, foreign investors seeking entry to 
Somalia are required to complete forms for approval, subject to the revision and consent 
of Somalia’s foreign investment board—which may reject an investment certificate if any 
of a series of discretionary performance requirements are not satisfied. Second, there 
is still a general lack of transparency in the incentives regime in Somalia. Third, while 
the 2023 IIPA improved the country’s investment protection framework, international 
best practices are still not followed in certain aspects. More specifically, while both 
the 2015 Foreign Investment Law and the 2023 IIPA uphold that the principle of 
nondiscrimination should be consistent with domestic law, protection provisions are 
relative and do not cover all types of investors. In addition, these laws fail to provide a 
most favored nation treatment guarantee, a definition of indirect expropriation under 
the law, or the opportunity for investors to resort to international arbitration before all 
local remedies are exhausted. Fourth, the country is still not a contracting state for the 
New York Convention for the recognition of foreign arbitral awards. It has signed only 
four bilateral investment agreements, of which only two are currently in force (those 
with the Arab Republic of Egypt and Germany) and, having been signed in the 1980s, 
are largely outdated in terms of international investment law and policy making. Fifth, 
SOMINVEST’s technical capacity, while improved, remains nascent.12 According to a 
recent survey by SOMINVEST,13 100 percent of firms determined that finding reliable 
information about investment opportunities in the country is an obstacle to entering 
the Somali market. A majority of firms also believe SOMINVEST’s overall technical 
capacity for investment promotion, entry and establishment, protection, and retention is 
underdeveloped.14
=== PAGE 58 ===
|  36  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Public-private partnerships
PPPs hold potential to help Somalia overcome its shortfall in infrastructure investment 
and provision of public goods; however, capacity to effectively leverage PPPs needs to 
be strengthened. Although some PPP arrangements have been facilitated in recent years 
in Somalia, most have been anchored by bilateral agreements and sector-specific laws.15 
For those projects that have not been able to leverage such agreements, the country’s 
regulatory framework does not enable an effective, transparent, and cost-effective 
procurement system for PPPs, with severe deficiencies in the regulatory framework that 
guides the implementation of PPPs in the country. Specifically, the Public Procurement, 
Concessions, and Disposal Act of 2016—which governs PPP procurement in 
Somalia—suffers from a wide range of gaps. To begin, there is little clarity as to which 
institutions are responsible for approving key decisions in the concessions process. 
The procurement and concession processes also lack clarity, allowing stakeholders to 
act in a highly discretionary manner. For instance, (a) there is no legal requirement to 
carry out prefeasibility studies or feasibility studies of proposed projects and (b) there 
is no clarity on how an entity may propose a project for concession,16 on which entity 
has to evaluate expressions of interest/requests for quotation of proposed projects, 
on who should approve the shortlisted bidders of a concession, and on what needs 
to happen after the negotiation with a bidder has been completed. Furthermore, 
Somalia’s Procurement Act does not provide a framework for unsolicited proposals. 
The current PPP governance framework also has institutional gaps. For instance, the 
Technical Concession Unit, which according to the prevailing regulatory framework 
is the secretariat that provides policy guidance and technical support and evaluates 
concession bids, has not been established yet. In order to close all these gaps, a PPP Act 
and regulations need to be enacted. With the proper regulatory environment, Somalia 
could ensure transparency and public participation in how PPP contracts are awarded 
and could overcome its shortfall in infrastructure investment and the provision of public 
goods in the areas of the economy in which the public sector or the private sector acting 
independently would otherwise come up short. 
Trade 
Somalia is positioning itself to benefit from expanding trade opportunities at both 
regional and global levels; however, the trade governance framework requires further 
strengthening. FGS has been working on developing its trade regulations and institutional 
capacity with support from development partners in recent years. In August 2021, 
it formally launched a trade information portal, which has already compiled trade 
regulations and requirements at the federal level and will identify and upload additional 
content as it becomes available at the FGS and FMS level. Now traders can easily access 
all existing regulatory information in one place. Somalia has also established a National 
Trade Facilitation Committee and has stepped up engagement in trade negotiating 
processes at both the regional and global levels. Specifically, Somalia is part of the 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) since 2018, is in the 
process of ratifying the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA),17 has applied 
to join the East African Community, and is taking steps toward its long-term ambition 
of accessing the World Trade Organization. However, significant steps remain to ensure 
that the country has a well-functioning trade governance framework. The trade portal, 
the area in which the most progress has been made, has not been updated since 2021 
and has yet to be rolled out to FMS. Other areas have wider gaps. For instance, handling 
of trade processes remains extremely sluggish in Somalia compared with regional peers, 
in matters such as lacking electronic cargo systems18 or single window systems,19 as well 
as authorized economic operator programs.20 The capacity of Somalia’s trade related 
institutions is also very weak at both FGS and the regional level.21
=== PAGE 59 ===
|  37  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
Quality standards and infrastructure 
Despite some recent progress, quality standards and infrastructure in Somalia are 
largely deficient, and relevant institutions remain at a nascent stage. Since the collapse 
of the state in 1991, Somalia has been lacking a government-led quality infrastructure 
ecosystem. Practical measures for public health and safety to ensure the quality of goods 
and enable exports are often lacking. Studies have found that quality concerns such as 
bacteria levels in processed foods have not been a priority in Somali meat and dairy 
markets,22 with buyers focusing on assessing products based on culturally understood 
trade practices and a subjective judgment of the physical and organoleptic properties of 
products.23 In an attempt to begin mitigating these issues, FGS established the Somalia 
Bureau of Standards (SoBS) in 2018 as an independent government agency reporting 
to the Minister of Commerce and Industry. With the 2020 Somalia Standards and 
Quality Control Act, FGS also legalized SoBS’s mandate to establish robust quality 
infrastructure and to promote exports through standards harmonization—that is, 
through inspection, testing, and product and system certification. Relatedly, FGS 
recently hired an international firm to perform conformity assessments for imports.24 
In this context, SoBS started operations in 2021 and has since led trainings, created 
various partnerships,25 and gained full membership to a series of regional and 
international standard bodies.26 Regional governments have also set up equivalent 
institutions.27 Despite this progress, quality standards and infrastructure in Somalia 
are largely deficient, and although technical assistance and capacity building by 
development partners is ongoing,28 the institutions regulating the sector remain nascent 
and weak. Proper legislative instruments to create a technical regulation framework 
and market surveillance system in the country have not been developed yet. A national 
quality policy and a SoBS strategic plan are in the process of being developed with 
support from development institutions. The country also has been unable to fully build 
its national accreditation body and to obtain international recognition on this front.
Property rights
Property rights remain a key barrier for private sector entities. The country’s 
“property rights and rule-based governance” is rated with the lowest score of 1 from 
a possible score of 6 by the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
(CPIA).29 The property rights component of the Heritage Foundation’s 2021 Index 
of Economic Freedom also ranks Somalia as 169th out of 182 countries.30 These 
ratings are unsurprising as legal and institutional frameworks remain underdeveloped 
and fragmented across property types. For instance, intellectual property rights, for 
which a ministerial decree was issued in November 2019, remain weak. Perhaps more 
importantly, formal government institutions of various functions and geographies 
compete for control of the land administration agenda.31 Because the central 
government generally lacks legitimacy with local communities,32 nonstate actors—
including the private sector—have a considerable role delivering land administration 
services since the civil war.33 The outdated legal framework34 that currently governs 
land administration in the country does not provide federal and local governments 
with a strong enough ability to register land and protect land tenure from land grabs.35 
Additionally, agencies in charge of land administration do not publish all required data 
for land property transactions,36 and there are many issues related to land tenure that 
are not regulated at all. In this regard, recent attempts by the FGS to craft new policies 
around land administration and to resolve the aforementioned issues have had limited 
success. Land tenure insecurity thus remains high and land contestation is prevalent,37 
with land claims being negotiated in various formal and informal forums to which more 
vulnerable and less connected members of society have little access,38 and land grabbing 
by powerful groups is very frequent (as will be discussed in section 3.3), affecting
=== PAGE 60 ===
|  38  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
women more heavily.39 In effect, according to a recent report by USAID,40 land disputes 
are overwhelmingly the largest justice issue in Mogadishu. There is also a substantial 
gender disparity with land tenure in the country – with only 38 percent of residential 
land and 29 percent of agricultural land owned independently being registered to a 
female owner.41 That situation is being aggravated by the extension of contestation over 
land in the aftermath of successive waves of displacement that is now extending from 
urban to peri-urban areas, affecting poor and displaced women the most.42
Tax burden
Tax administration reforms in recent years have been substantial. For instance, FGS 
has implemented a series of reforms to strengthen tax administration, including the 
establishment of a Tax Policy Unit for evidence-based reports and informed policy 
decisions, the establishment and operation of the Large and Medium Taxpayer offices, 
the transfer of collection fees from specific ministries to the Ministry of Finance, 
the development of a tax audit strategy, and the continuous training of tax officials. 
Progress has also been made in automating domestic revenue mobilization systems 
(such as introduction of electronic declarations and manifests), and the taxpayer 
registry has been linked to the Financial Management Information System in FGS. A 
longer-term solution, an Integrated Tax Administration Automation System, is under 
way and expected in 2024–25. Other initiatives in progress to enhance tax collection 
include extending the collection of sales taxes, such as through automated payment 
points, and increasing nontax revenues, particularly for highly profitable firms (such 
as in the telecommunications industry and other service sectors) that pay relatively low 
levels of taxes. FGS has also made considerable progress in harmonizing Somalia’s tax 
system at the FGS and FMS level. 
However, Somalia’s tax and revenue administration continues to be cumbersome for 
the private sector. Exemptions on corporate income tax, customs duties, and sales 
taxes on imported goods lack transparency.43 As a result, Somalia’s formal domestic 
revenue mobilization institutions are much less trusted than traditional or communal 
authorities.44 Furthermore, many of the tax harmonization agreements are yet to be 
implemented. The federal government institutions needed to operationalize these 
agreements (such as the Somalia Revenue Authority and Somalia Revenue Allocation 
Commission) are also yet to be established, and revenue assignments across federal 
structures are yet to be clarified. As such, for all intents and purposes, the country 
continues to have stand-alone revenue administrations in each region, with each FMS 
having its own inland revenue legislation and collecting and retaining its own taxes 
along with various fees. Similarly, with each FMS having adapted its own version of 
the Customs Act of 1961, Somalia has independent customs administrations for each 
operational port (with different tax rates across ports).45 In this context, the Somali 
private sector faces multiple taxation and high compliance costs (as firms must navigate 
different procedures in each state). Accordingly, the 2023 World Bank Logistics 
Performance Index ranks Somalia 140th out of 140 countries in the efficiency of 
customs and border management clearance.
=== PAGE 61 ===
|  39  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
Trusted ID verification
Trusted identity (ID) verification remains a challenge for the private sector in Somalia. 
Only 9 percent of the Somali population has a form of legal identification, with women 
being less likely to have any identity documents46 because of the customary involvement 
of clan elders in the process of obtaining such documentation.47 The lack of widely 
accepted and verifiable identity credentials represents a challenge, as global evidence 
suggests that trusted and inclusive identification systems can help the private sector by 
decreasing costs, increasing revenues, and improving the overall business climate.48 This 
gap is particularly critical for the development of the Somali financial system and for 
strengthening financial sector integrity, discussed in chapter 5. 
In this context, the enabling legal and institutional environment for a Somali ID system 
has progressed considerably in the past couple of years, yet large-scale ID registration 
is yet to commence. Since 2018, the FGS has made several significant steps toward the 
creation of a digital ID system. FGS adopted the Somali Digital Identification Policy 
in 2019, laying out the government’s vision for an ID system. In March 2023, a law 
setting out the ID system’s purpose and key features was adopted. The same law also 
(re)established an ID authority—the National Identification and Registration Authority 
(NIRA)—that is in the process of being fully operationalized. However, implementing 
regulations for the ID law have not yet been adopted. While the ID system was 
launched officially in Somalia in September 2023, a full-scale countrywide inclusive 
registration campaign is yet to commence. 
3.2	 OUTSIZED ROLE OF INFORMAL INSTITUTIONS 
Given Somalia’s state fragility, the private sector has leveraged informal trust-based 
institutions that have underpinned the country’s resilience for many decades. Since 
the 1980s, trust-based parallel informal institutions have been central to Somali 
business relations.49 Some are linked to clans and Xeer customary law,50 with reciprocal 
obligations to members of the same subclan or sub lineage units allowing for strong 
trade and transnational capital networks, even when their common ancestors are many 
generations removed.51 Relationships of trust and credit that are based on clan identity 
are thus key features of business relations.52 There are also a series of self-sustaining 
non-clan trust-based informal institutions that have been essential to the functioning 
of the Somali private sector in recent decades. For instance, the development of 
mu’amala—which consists of the social capital developed through good conduct 
across repeated transactions—has historically allowed Somali livestock exporters to 
access informal credit advances that replaced the formal credit advances on which 
they depended before the civil war. Another example, often used by Somalis as a 
dispute settlement and collective insurance mechanism, is the informal institution of 
mu’salaha—in which a committee of trustworthy traders not only mediates and makes 
binding decisions in cases of default between businesses but also fundraises money to 
cover debts in cases of force majeure.53
=== PAGE 62 ===
|  40  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
However, Somali informal institutions have a wide range of issues that reproduce 
socioeconomic inequalities and make relying on them for inclusive private sector 
development unsustainable.54 Many Somali businesses are able to reap the rewards 
of lax regulatory frameworks while relying on informal trust-based institutions, but 
continued private sector growth that depends solely on these social contracts would 
be very difficult for many reasons. First, the weakness of formal institutions such as 
legal contracts increases risks, uncertainty, and fraudulence despite sanctions imposed 
by informal institutions. This is especially true when there are issues with enforcement 
between clans of differing political or military power, or when business counterparts 
are beyond the reach of traditional societal networks. For instance, the number and 
value of livestock exporters robbed by livestock agents from Middle Eastern countries 
is considerable.55 Second, informal institutions in Somalia are largely inequitable, even 
when they work properly. This situation has significant impacts for businesswomen. 
For example, women entrepreneurs are often unable to rent land or obtain informal 
loans without the support of a male guarantor or relative.56 
3.3	 CORRUPTION
Despite considerable efforts to address the issue, corruption affects the effectiveness 
of all formal institutional and regulatory frameworks that have been developed for 
the Somali private sector. The FGS has been making strides to increase transparency 
across multiple dimensions—including on the fiscal and financial sector governance,57 
anti-corruption,58 and anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of terrorism 
(AML/CFT).59 Despite these efforts, Somalia continues to be ranked as one of 
the countries most affected by corruption, as evidenced by third-party corruption 
indicators, including Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index, Verisk 
Maplecroft's Corruption Index, and the World Governance Indicator's control of 
corruption indicator.60 Similarly, out of 194 countries measured by Trace International 
for its Bribery Risk Index in 2023, Somalia comes in at 182nd, putting it below most 
FCV comparators.61 The African Integrity Indicators also give Somalia a score of zero 
in a range of corruption-related areas, including the level of independence of officials 
appointed to the body investigating public sector corruption.62 This impression is 
mirrored by the perception of Somalis. According to a rapid firm survey conducted 
by the Somali Chamber of Commerce and Industry in December 2019, 64 percent of 
all firms and a larger proportion of small firms listed corruption as a major issue.63 
Similarly, 61.5 percent of respondents to a 2016 survey conducted by the Legacy Center 
for Peace and Transparency singled out corruption as the primary issue faced by private 
sector stakeholders.64 
Issues with corruption, in the implementation of many of the formal regulatory 
frameworks for the private sector, have not been completely addressed. For instance, 
corruption can influence business registry, licensing, and trade processes. In the 
fishing industry, some local Somali agents enable fishing vessels of mostly foreign 
origin to engage in illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing practices.65 In the 
import-export industry, many products tend to be smuggled across Somalia’s porous 
borders and extensive coastline,66 enabling some private sector stakeholders to exert 
unfair competitive pressure on firms that do not avoid customs. As another example, 
corruption has a significant effect on land registry and tenure processes.67 Land 
grabbing by powerful groups has become a recurrent land appropriation strategy and 
is often enabled with the eventual issuance of land title deeds,68 with land brokers, local 
governments, and other stakeholders involved in land management receiving fees.69 
In some cases, local governments also sell off land to politically connected people or 
facilitate long-term leases of public land to private companies at low prices.70
=== PAGE 63 ===
|  41  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
Public procurements and legal proceedings can also be affected by issues related to 
bribery and corruption. This is especially true in cases of public procurements, in 
which targeted allocation of lucrative public sector contracts to favored firms with little 
transparency continues to occur despite the PFM Act being approved in 2019 and the 
Procurement Law and related regulations being issued and implemented.71 Instances 
of targeted recruitment of favored individuals in lucrative public sector positions,72 
diversions of in-kind external assistance,73 illicit sales of tax-exemption status to 
individuals and firms importing or exporting goods,74 and illicit sales of resource 
extraction permits75 have also been reported in the Somali context. Businesses also 
sometimes deal with corruption when dealing with the courts.76 
3.4	 PREVALENCE OF COMPETING ALTERNATIVE GOVERNANCE 
ARRANGEMENTS 
Coercion by armed groups lead to multiple levels of taxes and fees, and an elevation 
of private sector entities’ tax burden. Apart from overlapping public administrations, 
there are also de facto governance arrangements with nonstate entities. For instance, 
the payment of “taxes” to Al-Shabaab through a range of revenue streams is seen by 
many businesses as the most extractive of taxes.77 Al-Shabaab’s continued control 
over some of Somalia’s hinterland, despite recent territorial losses, allows for illicit 
taxation at roadblocks on trade corridors (figure 3.2).78 Al-Shabaab also has revenue 
streams which are extorted outside of the territory it controls. These include (a) forced 
Zakat79 contributions, which are collected twice a year on agriculture, once a year on 
other wealth, and once a year at the end of Ramadan;80 (b) extortion of businesses 
and individuals operating in the Mogadishu and Kismayo ports, facilitated through 
an infiltration of government institutions to access manifests with data on businesses’ 
imports and exports;81 (c) kidnappings for ransom; and (d) service charges.82 All of 
these revenue streams have significant implications by imposing an additional layer of 
“tax” burden on the private sector, increasing the cost of doing business for firms and 
complicating FGS’s efforts to improve its domestic revenue collection.83 The multiple 
taxation of trade through formal checkpoints by multiple public administrations, and 
illicit checkpoints by nonstate actors like Al-Shabaab, also contributes to the geographic 
fragmentation of Somalia’s domestic market.84
Private sector entities also need to be aware of different and often conflicting judicial 
governance arrangements. The Somali private sector suffers from legal pluralism with a 
range of state, customary, and religious norms coproducing governance.85 The FGS justice 
system is perceived by most Somalis as not serving justice,86 and as such, justice and 
mediation functions have broadly fallen to clan and religious authorities. Al-Shabaab’s 
courts are also often perceived by Somalis as the most efficient and effective in the 
country’s most remote areas,87 and sometimes in urban regions as well. Legal pluralism 
makes it complicated for private sector institutions to know which rules to follow.88
=== PAGE 64 ===
|  42  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Source: 	 Jay Bahadur, “Terror and Taxes: Inside al-Shabaab’s Revenue Collection Machine”  
(Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime, Geneva, Switzerland, 2022).
FIGURE 3.2 TRANSPORT ROUTES AND AL-SHABAAB VEHICLE TAXATION 
POINTS, 2022 
3.5	 LACK OF AN EFFECTIVE AND INCLUSIVE NATIONAL  
PUBLIC-PRIVATE DIALOGUE MECHANISM 
The unique relationship between the private sector and government institutions in 
Somalia underlines the importance of an adequate PPD mechanism for the country. 
As mentioned in chapter 2, on the state of the private sector, some private sector firms 
have attained considerable influence and maintain an outsized role in the provision of 
social services and public goods. However, market inefficiencies and competition issues 
preclude efficient market outcomes and impede inclusive and sustainable growth in 
Somalia.89 The country’s under-regulated environment thus needs to be further reformed. 
Discussions on the role of the state and the private sector in the provision of services 
and the overall development of Somalia are also necessary, so lines for public-private 
cooperation can be drawn. Some influential private sector firms seem to be increasingly 
aligned with this standpoint.90 Private sector entities generally understand that the state 
is essential for political and economic stability, and that institutional reform would 
help eradicate certain aspects of the complex and fluid current business environment. 
A number of them are also reaching a growth threshold that will be complicated to 
surpass without a broader and more inclusive economic growth trajectory that expands 
demand for their businesses.91 However, a dearth of trust among different stakeholders 
is still constraining progress on this front.92 Experiences in other countries suggest that 
PPD among societal stakeholders, government entities, and the private sector can be 
very helpful in creating a culture of dialogue and transparency, and in achieving greater 
trust to resolve a country’s issues.93 Developing efficient PPD mechanisms in Somalia is 
therefore essential.
Al-Shabaab checkpoint, as represented in the dataset
Major Jubaland checkpoint
Approximate zone of Al-Shabaab direct administrative Control
Major commercial flows, as represented in the dataset
=== PAGE 65 ===
|  43  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
In this context, many steps have already been taken to develop PPD in Somalia. With 
support from development partners, the government has engaged with the private 
sector since the first PPD was launched in 2016, and private sector entities contributed 
to the 2017–2019 National Development Plan. During this process, existing chambers 
of commerce met for the first time, and a series of recommendations were agreed on. 
A PPD conference also occurred in London in May 2017, bringing together some of 
Somalia’s most influential private sector firms, development institutions, and government 
leaders. Since then, development partner–supported PPDs for specific economic 
sectors have led to the development of some sector-specific legislation (including the 
Communications Law and the Electricity Act). PPD on a series of other topics is also 
ongoing. On another note, a number of business member organizations (such as Somalia 
Banker’s Association) have developed. These business member organizations (BMOs) are 
currently focused on incentivizing PPD to provide input in the development of legal and 
policy frameworks in their respective markets.94 
However, inclusive sustainable national dialogue has not been achieved, and the lack 
of trust between different stakeholders remains a considerable issue.95 There are a 
wide range of reasons for this. First, the few national high-profile PPD meetings that 
have taken place have not led to an institutionalized PPD mechanism. The momentum 
of Somalia’s initial steps on PPD has in effect waned with the Somalia National 
PPD mechanism established in 2016 having ceased to exist.96 Second, despite recent 
consolidation efforts, BMOs (such as chambers of commerce) tend to be largely 
territorial, and PPD efforts are often conducted at a regional level.97 Third, the endeavors 
implemented to develop PPD at a sectoral level have been mostly time-bound sector-
specific processes that have been set up to solve a set of issues and then disbanded. 
There are thus no sustainable and structured forums for a collaborative PPD process 
which could increase trust between stakeholders over time. Furthermore, while some of 
these processes have had significant achievements, many have failed because of a lack of 
resources. Fourth, PPD processes often include only a few influential firms and BMOs. 
Furthermore, while BMOs with a certain level of formality and capacity exist in the 
country,98 and cooperation among larger BMOs has improved in recent years,99 Somali 
BMOs cover only a small proportion of the firms in Somalia and suffer from weak 
governance arrangements.100 Other membership organizations that support the interests 
of private sector ventures in Somalia (such as pastoral groups and village savings and 
loan associations) remain largely underdeveloped. Accordingly, although FGS does 
consult with the private sector for inputs to inform legal, regulatory, and institutional 
reforms, it does so only with a selected group of stakeholders, leaving the voices of 
more than 90 percent of private sector stakeholders outside the conversation.101 This 
is particularly true of women-led businesses, which have very limited representation in 
public and private sector leadership positions.102
=== PAGE 66 ===
|  44  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Notes
1 .        Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023.
2.        The World Bank and development partners are already addressing some of these drivers through politically feasible reforms 
that aim to restore and strengthen basic state functions (including the World Bank Somalia Second Inclusive Growth 
Development Policy Operation), but this process remains nascent.
3.         Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023.
4.         Andreja Marusic et al., “Trust between Public and Private Sectors: The Path to Better Regulatory Compliance?,” Trust 
Literature Review, September 2020; and World Bank. Public-Private Dialogue in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations—Experiences 
and Lessons Learned (Washington, DC: World Bank, June 2014).
5.        For instance, an MSME policy, industrial development policy, and trade policy have been developed and approved in recent 
years.
6.        SOMINVEST (Somali Investment Promotion Office), A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment in Somalia’s Energy Sector, 
February 2022.
7.         SOMINVEST, A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.
8.	
Facility for Talo and Leadership, “Somali’s Parliamentary Committee Seeks Clarification on Investment Promotion  
Agency Bill,” February 3, 2023, https://www.ftlsomalia.com/somalias-parliamentary-committee-seeks-clarification-on-
investment-promotion-agency-bill/.
9.      	 Consultations with Somali private sector stakeholders and SOMINVEST in Mogadishu and Nairobi in January 2023. See 
also Douglas Okwatch, “Somalia: Africa’s New Investment Frontier,” African Renewal, December 2022, https://www.un.org/
africarenewal/magazine/december-2022/somalia-africa%E2%80%99s-new-investment-frontier.
10. 	
See, for instance, Somaliland’s Special Economic Zones Law (93/2021).
11.        For instance, there is a maximum for foreign ownership in new locally incorporated tourism companies (limited to 49 
percent); commercial banking boards of directors must have at least one resident of Somalia; and maritime-freight transport 
services are obligated to use local service providers, among other issues.
12.       Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 2023.
13.        SOMINVEST, A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.
14.       Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023; SOMINVEST, A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.
15.       For instance, investments by Favori LLC in the Mogadishu airport and by Albayrak Group in the Mogadishu seaport. For more 
information on this topic, see EY, Draft Rapid PPP Assessment for the FGS (financed by the World Bank), April 2017.
16.       A project can only apply for a concession certificate if it has been included in the Annual Concession Plan. However, there is 
no provision in the Procurement Act and related regulations as to how projects are included in that plan. 
17.        Discussion in the parliament for ratification started in mid-August 2023.
18.       An electronic cargo tracking system (ECTS) is a tool based on GPS devices, Wi-Fi, cellular data, or radio frequency 
identification (RFID) used by Customs agencies to ensure the integrity of cargo moving in transit through their territories.
19.       A single window system offers a single point of entry and a single submission of trade-relevant data for traders, and a more 
efficient and faster handling of trade processes.
20.      World Bank, Horn of Africa Secretariat, “Regional Trade Facilitation Roadmap 2022–2025,” June 2022.
21.       World Bank and Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), “Somalia: The Road to WTO Accession” 
(policy note, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021); and World Bank, Somaliland Trade Regime Review: Improvement and Reform 
Plan, 2018. 
22.	
Oxfam, “Market Analysis of the Somaliland Dairy Sector,” 2018. 
23.	
World Bank, “Somalia Quality Infrastructure—Supply and Demand Assessment” (internal document, World Bank, 
Washington, DC, August 2020). 
24.	
Consultations with public sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi between January and July 2023.
25.	
For instance, it has entered into a trade and economic partnership agreement under the Türkiye-Somalia Economic 
Cooperation Commission to cooperate in the fields of technical regulation, standardization, conformity assessment, 
accreditation, and metrology.
=== PAGE 67 ===
|  45  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
26.	
These organization include the (a) International Organization for Standardization (ISO), (b) Standards and Metrology 
Institute for Islamic Countries (SMIIC), (c) African Organization for Standardization (ARSO), (d) Arab Industrial Development, 
Standardization and Mining Organization (AIDSMO), (e) International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and (f) Codex 
Aliamentarius, an international body that sets food standards, guidelines, and codes.
27.	
For instance, the Somaliland Quality Control Commission (SQCC).
28.	
For instance, the World Bank and development partners are supporting FGS in developing a Feasibility Single Window, 
a Veterinary Drug Policy, guidelines for a National Veterinary Policy, a Food Safety Policy, and a Livestock Identification 
Traceability Assessment and Policy. The World Bank and development partners have done assessments of testing needs to 
satisfy Somalia’s requirements in some export markets (such as livestock and crops) and in the potential needs of domestic 
markets. 
29.	
World Bank, CPIA Africa: Policies for Economic Resilience in a Turbulent World (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2023). 
30.	
See https://www.heritage.org/index/explore.
31.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
32.	
Rift Valley Institute, Land Administration and Governance Challenges of Rapid Urbanization and Forced Displacement in Somalia 
(Kismayo, Mogadishu, Baidoa): Mogadishu Report (Nairobi, Kenya: Rift Valley Institute, 2020).
33.	
For more information on this topic, see World Bank. Somalia Urbanization Review.
34.	
Somalia lacks a comprehensive land law. Key land legislation comprises (a) the Law of Urban Land Distribution (no. 41 of 
1973), (b) the Law on Agricultural Land (no. 73 of 1975), (c) the Law on Urban Land (no.61 of 1981), and (d) the Decree on 
Appropriation of Land for Public Interest.
35.	
Rift Valley Institute, Land Administration and Governance Challenges.
36.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 2023.
37.	
Rift Valley Institute, Land Administration and Governance Challenges. 
38.	
Tobias Hagmann, Not So Public Goods: The Political Economy of Urbanization in Selected Somali Cities (Nairobi, Kenya: Rift 
Valley Institute, 2019). 
39.	
Upon the death of a male relative, women are especially at risk of land grabbing, owing to their lack of recognition in 
Somalia’s predominantly customary land tenure system. For more information on this front, see Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods (Budapest, Hungary: FAO, 
2021).
40.	
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), “Pathways and Institutions for Resolving Land Disputes in 
Mogadishu” (Washington, DC: USAID, 2020); Expanding Access to Justice Program, Access to Justice Assessment Tool: Baseline 
Study (Nairobi, Kenya: Pact and the American Bar Association Rule of Law Initiative, 2020).
41.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 2023.
42.	
Juliette Syn and Laura Cunial, “‘Who Are You?’: Linkages between Legal Identity and Housing, Land and Property Rights in 
Somalia” (Norwegian Refugee Council, Oslo, 2022).
43.	
Gilbert Kalyundu and John Norregaard, “Designing Federal Tax Policy for Enhanced Domestic Revenue Mobilization” 
(technical report, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, 2020).
44.	
Sher Khan et al., Somalia Customs Compliance Study: Assessing Enforcement, Facilitation, and Trust (draft report, Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2021). 
45.	
For more information on this topic see: Thomas Cantens, “Somalia: Assessment of Customs Revenue Potential and Proposals 
for Reform” (internal document, World Customs Organization Research Unit, World Bank Somalia Governance Program with 
Support from UK Department for International Development, 2018). See also World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New 
Somali Government: Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022).
46.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, 2022 Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey.
47.	
Syn and Cunial, “Who Are You?”
48.	
World Bank, “Private Sector Economic Impacts from Identification Systems” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018).
49.	
Jamil A. Mubarak, “The “Hidden Hand” behind the Resilience of the Stateless Economy of Somalia,” World Development 25, 
no. 12 (1997): 2027–41. 
50.	
Xeer is an unwritten code of conduct that evolved orally over time on the basis of interactions between various Somali clans 
since the 1800s. It is usually implemented by groups of respected elders (Xeer Begti) and is often the first line of recourse for 
dispute management in the country.
=== PAGE 68 ===
|  46  |
	
CROSS-CUTTING POLICY CONSTRAINTS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT IN SOMALIA 
51.	
Paul Goldsmith, “The Somali Impact on Kenya, 1990–1993: The View from the Camps,” in Mending Rips in the Sky: Options for 
Somali Communities in the 21st Century, ed. H.M. Adam and R. Ford (Lawrenceville, NJ: Red Sea Press, 1997); and Stephanie R. 
Bjork, “Modernity Meets Clan: Cultural Intimacy in the Somali Diaspora” in From Mogadishu to Dixon: The Somali Diaspora in a 
Global Context, ed. Abdi M. Kusow and S.R. Bjork (Trenton, NJ: Red Sea Press, 2007).
52.	
Neil Carrier, Little Mogadishu: Eastleigh, Nairobi’s Global Somali Hub (London: Hurst, 2016); Neil C. M. Carrier and Hannah Elliott, 
“Entrust We Must: The Role of ‘Trust’ in Somali Economic Life” (DIIS Working Paper 2018:2, Danish Institute for International 
Studies, Copenhagen, 2018).
53.	
For more information on this topic, see Ahmed A. Musa, “From Trust to Oligopoly: Institutional Change in Livestock Trade in 
Somaliland after 1991” (DIIS Working Paper 2019:8, Danish Institute for International, Copenhagen, August 2019).
54.	
Mahdi Abdile, “Customary Dispute Resolution in Somalia,” African Conflict and Peacebuilding Review 2, no. 1 (2012); and Joakim 
Gundel, “The Predicament of the ‘Oday’: The Role of Traditional Structures in Security, Rights, Law and Development in 
Somalia” (final report, Danish Refugee Council and Novib/Oxfam, Nairobi, Kenya, 2006).
55.	
Musa, “From Trust to Oligopoly”; and Nisar Majid, “Livestock Trade in the Djibouti, Somali, and Ethiopian Borderlands” (Briefing 
Paper AFP BP 2010/01, Chatham House, London, September 2010). 
56.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
57.	
For instance, note the following: (a) The Somalia Financial Management Information System was fully implemented in 2019; 
(b) various improvements have been made to budget preparation, cash management, and legislated sequestration rules; (c) 
the Public Financial Management (PFM) Act was approved in 2019 and significant efforts have been made on transparent 
fiscal reporting, expenditure control, and procurement; (d) the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) has made important progress 
in improving its governance, transparency, and capacity; (e) banks and money transfer businesses are subject to regular 
on- and off-site inspections and annual relicensing, and the CBS launched in 2021 the licensing and regulation of mobile money 
operators.
58.	
For instance, under the National Anti-Corruption Strategy, (a) a Code of Conducts for civil servants was established; (b) 
clear policies have been developed on dismissal, career advancement, career development, and other areas relevant to 
the management of public servants; and (c) the National Civil Service Commission now advertises positions with clear job 
descriptions and expected work outputs.
59.	
For instance, (a) Somalia passed the AML/CFT Act in 2016, (b) the Financial Reporting Center (FRC) was set up, and (c) the 
National Money Laundering/Financing of Terrorism (ML/FT) Risk Assessment was finalized and published in 2022.
60.	
In 2021, Somalia ranked jointly 178th of 180 with Syria, just ahead of South Sudan. Its score improved slightly from 8/100 in 2015 
to 13/100 in 2021. See www.transparency.org. 
61.	
Trace International, Bribery Risk Matrix 2022, TRACE Bribery Risk Matrix | View Country Risk Scores (traceinternational.org).
62.	
Africa Integrity Indicators, 2022, https://www.africaintegrityindicators.org/data.
63.	
Peter Middlebrook, Hussein Siad, and Hussein Haji Mao, “Somalia Vision for Private Sector Development Report” (Working 
Paper 5, National Economic Council of Somalia, Mogadishu, December 2019.)
64.	
Legacy Center for Peace and Transparency, “Overview of Corruption, Underlying Causes, and Its Impacts in Somalia!,” 2016, 
http://legacycentersom.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/10/Research-on-Corruption-and-its-Impacts-in-Somalia.pdf.
65.	
Jay Bahadur, “Fishy Business: Illegal Fishing in Somalia and the Capture of State Institutions” (Global Initiative Against 
Transnational Organized Crime, Geneva, Switzerland, 2021).
66.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum.
67.	
Anette Hofmann et al., Somalia’s Business Elites: Political Power and Economic Stakes across the Somali Territories and in Four Key 
Economic Sectors (The Hague: Clingendael Conflict Research Unit, 2017).
68.	
Alex de Waal, “The Prairie Fire That Burned Mogadishu: The Logic of Clan Formation in Somalia” (occasional paper, World 
Peace Foundation, Somerville, MA, 2018).
69.	
Tobias Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities: Urbanization and Public Goods in Somalia” (Rift Valley Institute, Nairobi, Kenya, 
2020).
70.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review.
71.	
Marqaati, “2016 State of Accountability in Somalia: Unrestrained Corruption,” 2017, https://marqaati.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/02/Marqaati-2016-Corruption-Report.pdf. 
72.	
Guled Musse, “Beyle oo loo haysto kiis musuq oo la xiriira dad ay qaraabo yihiin [in Somali]” Caasimada Online, July 4, 2022.
73.	
Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime, “In Somalia, COVID-19 Opens Up New Avenues for Corruption,” Risk 
Bulletin 9, Civil Society Observatory of Illicit Economies in Eastern and Southern Africa, June–July 2020.
74.	
Nisar Majid et al., “Somalia’s Politics: The Usual Business?” (Conflict Research Programme synthesis paper, London School of 
Economics, 2021).
75.	
Bahadur, Fishy Business.
=== PAGE 69 ===
|  47  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
76.	
Kaunain Rahman, “Somalia: Overview of Corruption and Anti-corruption” (Anti-corruption Help Desk brief, CHR. Michelsen 
Institute, Bergen, Norway, 2017).
77.	
For more details, see United Nations Panel of Experts on Somalia, “Report of the Panel of Experts on Somalia,” submitted in 
accordance with resolution 2551 (2020), 6 October 2021, https://www.undocs.org/en/S/2021/849.
78.	
IAAAP Somalia Accountability Project, “Beyond Isbaaro: Reclaiming Somalia’s Haunted Roads” (Transparency Solutions, 
Hargeisa, Somalia, 2016). For more information see Jay Bahadur, “Terror and Taxes: Inside al-Shabaab’s Revenue Collection 
Machine” (Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime, Geneva, Switzerland, 2022).
79.	
Zakat is an Islamic tax of 2.5 percent on all wealth.
80.	
United Nations Security Council, “Letter dated 16 September 2021 from the Panel of Experts on Somalia addressed to the Chair 
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia.”
81.	
United Nations Security Council, “Letter dated 28 September 2020 from the Panel of Experts on Somalia addressed to the Chair 
of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia”; and United Nations Security Council, 
“Letter dated 16 September 2021 from the Panel of Experts on Somalia.”
82.	
The United Nations Security Council’s Somalia panel of experts investigated in 2021 attempts by Al-Shabaab to extend its illicit 
“taxation” to a series of professional services professionals, including doctors, teachers, and university professors. 
83.	
According to consultations with Somali private sector stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi, sector “taxation” 
at checkpoints needs to be paid only if a driver uses Al-Shabaab transit routes, which commercial drivers often prefer to do, 
because revenue collection in these routes is viewed as more consistent and predictable than that at roadblocks administered 
by government-aligned security forces. But both government-administered and Al-Shabaab–administered checkpoints are 
drivers of the elevated tax burdens on transport in South Somalia.
84.	
World Bank Group, Collection of Policy Notes.
85.	
Ken Menkhaus, “State Failure, State-Building, and Prospects for a ’Functional Failed State’ in Somalia,” Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science 656, no. 1 (2014): 154–72. 
86.	
Joakim Gundel, Louis Alexandre Berg, and Yahya Ibrahim, “Political Economy of Justice in Somalia” (working paper, World Bank, 
Washington, DC, 2016).
87.	
Hussein Yusef Ali, “Youth Radicalisation: Causes, Consequences, and Potential Solutions” in War and Peace in Somalia: National 
Grievances, Local Conflict and Al-Shabaab, ed. Michael Keating and Matt Waldman, paperback ed. (London: Hurst, 2018); and Freedom 
House, “Somalia,” 2022, https://freedomhouse.org/country/somalia/freedom-world/2022.
88.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 2023.
89.	
Tatiana Nenova, “Private Sector Response to the Absence of Government Institutions in Somalia” (working paper, World Bank, 
Washington DC, 2004).
90.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023; and World Bank, “Somali Public Private Dialogue—Peace, Prosperity & Development for Somalia, July 2018. 
91.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023.
92.	
Abdi Ismail Samatar and Ahmed I. Samatar, “Bereft of Trust: Reflection on the Cause of the Somali Catastrophe” Bildhaan: An 
International Journal of Somali Studies 22 (2022).
93.	
Marusic et al., “Trust between Public and Private Sectors”; and World Bank, Public-Private Dialogue.
94.	
Kim Eric Bettcher, “Mapping Report: Formalisation of Cooperatives and Private Sector Organizations” Somalia Investment 
Promotion Office, 2022.
95.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023.
96.	
Made up of a high-level forum, a secretariat, and advisory council to discuss broader enabling environment topics aligned 
with business environment indicators and working groups for various economic sectors (such as financial, information and 
communication technology, agribusiness, and electricity).
97.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 
2023.
98.	
Bettcher, “Mapping Report.” 
99.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 2023.
100.	 The largest national BMOs in Somalia, which comprise firms from various regions in the country, have around 2,000 members. 
Other BMOs are significantly smaller. For more information on this front, see Bettcher, “Mapping Report”; and World Bank and 
Dansk Industri, “Organizational and Membership Assessment of Business Member Organizations in Somalia, 2018. 
101.	
Consultations with Somali private stakeholders in Hargeisa, Mogadishu, and Nairobi between November 2022 and January 2023.
102.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, 2019 Labour Force Survey (LFS) Report, 2021; and Somali National Bureau of Statistics, 
Women and Men in Somalia: Facts and Figures—2022, July 2022.
=== PAGE 70 ===
|  48  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
	
CRITICAL ENABLING 
SECTOR BOTTLENECKS 
TO THE PRIVATE  
SECTOR
4.
Further efforts are needed to address issues related to access, availability, and 
performance of enabling sectors for private sector development in Somalia. Efficient 
and accessible delivery of key enabling services is critical to facilitate diversification 
to higher-value-added activities, which, in turn, is critical for the generation of high-
quality jobs in Somalia. This is the case not only in general, but also for the food value 
chains in which such diversification and value addition are most likely to be achieved 
in Somalia. However, delivery of services in key enabling sectors was incrementally 
spoiled after the civil war.1 The private sector has stepped in during recent decades to 
provide some of these services, but it avoids investing in nonexcludable products and 
infrastructure, leading to a situation in which services are insufficient and provided 
only in select regions to people who can afford them. This situation occurs in a context 
of low technical capacity to significantly scale up government-led service delivery and 
of financial resources for this purpose that are not only scarce but also ineffectively 
used—with little coordination among the ministries stewarding the sectors.2 This 
section outlines key enabling sector issues that are major constraints to diversification 
to higher-value-added activities in food value chains—including transport and logistics, 
digital connectivity, water, education, and business services. The energy and financial 
sectors, which also constrain such diversification in Somalia, will be discussed in depth 
in chapter 6 of this CPSD.3
4.1	 TRANSPORT AND LOGISTICS
Deficiencies in the transport and logistics sectors severely constrain economic 
development in Somalia. The country is afflicted by elevated road transport prices and 
high port and airport fees as well as security challenges and other constraints to long-
haul transport. Although trade goes on uninterrupted in Somalia despite widespread 
security issues (even in the most insecure areas of the country),4 Somalia’s geographic 
economic fragmentation is considerable, especially between landlocked versus coastal 
areas and rural versus urban areas. This situation results primarily from three factors in 
addition to the governance issues mentioned in previous sections (such as illegal road 
checkpoints): (a) poor transport infrastructure, (b) market distortions in the logistics 
industry, and (c) weak governance with nascent and low-capacity institutions in the 
logistics sector.
=== PAGE 71 ===
|  49  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
Transport infrastructure gaps prevail across Somalia
Although there is very little information on the transport sector in Somalia, the limited 
data available point to significant transport infrastructure gaps. Transport infrastructure 
in Somalia consists primarily of airfields, ports, and roads since there are no railways 
or notable inland waterways. The country’s ranking in the World Bank’s Logistics 
Performance Index has declined from 127th out of 150 in 2007 to 138th out of 140 in 
2023. More specifically, in quality of trade and transport-related infrastructure, Somalia 
ranks 133rd out of 140 countries. National institutions in the transport sector are 
either weak or nascent; as a result, the Somali government lacks capacity for transport 
infrastructure planning, development, and management.5 There is also a scarcity of 
analytical data to underpin development of a pipeline of investments to close transport 
infrastructure gaps, establish tools for good sector management, and delineate steps for 
institutional and capacity development.
Of all modes of transport in Somalia, aviation is the one that works best, though 
with a number of limitations. Regulated by the Somali Civil Aviation Authority, the 
aviation sector serves as a key gateway both to the country and within it, although most 
intra-African air transport remains largely closed to Somalia. Almost all smaller urban 
centers in the country maintain at least one airstrip capable of handling small aircraft.6 
The country has six major airports, seven feeder airports, and 23 smaller airstrips. All 
of these airstrips are used by humanitarian flights and by the local commercial carriers 
that filled the void created by the collapse of Somali Airlines in 1991 (figure 4.1).7 
Some international commercial airlines also operate in Somalia. The main demand for 
aviation services in Somalia continues to stem from government, humanitarian and 
development cooperation and medical emergency activities.8 As such, the number of 
passengers per year in traffic from Somalia and the ratio of passenger movement to 
urban population are both relatively small.9 Although there are no statistics available 
for total volumes of cargo handled by Somali airports, some reports suggest that 
these volumes are also low in per capita terms when compared with those handled 
in neighboring country airports.10 This is partly a result of the underdevelopment of 
the private sector in some regions of the country, but it is also because the largest 
international airport in Somalia (Mogadishu’s Aden Adde International Airport) has 
little space for logistics and warehousing of private sector goods because of the intensive 
use of its facilities by development institutions and state agencies.11 Safety is also an 
issue for both international and domestic airports in Somalia. The series of costs that 
airlines need to assume in Somalia due to these safety issues,12 in conjunction with a 
subdued volume of operations and considerable trade taxes by FGS and FMS, make 
airline transport in Somalia extremely expensive.
=== PAGE 72 ===
|  50  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Source: 	 United Nations, Office for the Coordination of  
Humanitarian Affairs. Taken from African  
Development Bank, Somalia—Transport Sector  
Needs Assessment and Investment Programme  
(Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: AfDB, 2016).
Source: 	 World Food Programme. Taken from Inros Lackner SE, 
HEFI, and Africa Enablers GmBH, Port Master Plan – 
Final Report (Ministry of Finance of the Federal Repub-
lic of Somalia, December 2017).
FIGURE 4.1 MAJOR AIRPORTS AND AIRSTRIPS  
IN SOMALIA 
FIGURE 4.2 SOMALIA ROADS NETWORK
Although there is little available information about Somali maritime port facilities, 
existing assessments suggest that their performance is subpar. There are five operational 
international ports in Somalia that serve as gateways to major transport corridors in the 
country. The port in Kismayo is officially run by Somali federal government institutions; 
there are long-term concessions to international firms for the management of the 
maritime ports in Berbera, Bosaso, and Mogadishu;13 and local private investors are 
self-financing the port in Gara’ad. Assessments point to these ports being in a reasonable 
condition but also suggest that they are characterized by relatively poor performance.14 
Although information about maritime ports remains outdated and partial,15 factors 
that are affecting their performance appear to include outworn infrastructure and 
equipment, low utilization of resources, lack of modern handling equipment, a dearth 
of navigational aids, inadequate maritime safety and security, lack of supporting 
information technology operation systems, and outdated working practices of dock 
workers, among others.16 Traffic volumes at Somali ports are also not high enough 
to justify construction of competing terminals by different private operators within 
ports, preventing the positive impacts on efficiency that such competition could create. 
Occupancy at Somalia’s seaports was estimated to be around 20 percent of its capacity
=== PAGE 73 ===
|  51  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
by a recent transport needs assessment.17 Apart from inefficiency, port operations in 
Somalia are also characterized by their high costs. Although costs vary considerably 
by port, charges are generally excessive. For example, the published handling charge 
in Berbera Port is US$140/20-foot container, and terminal handling charged by CMA 
CGM Group18 in that port is US$591/20-foot container—both are many times higher 
than charges in Indian subcontinent ports.19 These charges are one of the main sources 
of domestic revenue mobilization for all jurisdictions.20 That said, the charges are also 
ridden with hidden costs.21
Somalia’s road infrastructure, which is the country’s principal mode of transport, faces a 
number of deficiencies. With a total 21,830 kilometers of roads,22 Somalia’s road density 
is approximately 3.5 per 100 square kilometers of territory, which is lower than most 
benchmarks in Africa and the world (figure 5.2). The overall condition of Somalia’s 
road network is poor, with over 90 percent of the 2,860 kilometers of paved roads in 
Somalia having deteriorated beyond their design life.23 The rest of the country’s roads 
have gravel or earth surfaces that are extremely hard to traverse, especially during rainy 
seasons. In effect, a mere 31.2 percent of the country’s rural population is within 2 
kilometers of an all-season road, compared with 56 percent in Kenya.24 Such challenging 
infrastructure, in conjunction with Somalia’s difficult topographical conditions, leads to 
elevated fuel consumption for road transport providers and to high maintenance costs 
and an aging and poor-quality road transport fleet vehicles. This issue, in conjunction 
with other factors such as checkpoints, roadblocks, and the lack of a unified database 
of vehicles and drivers, makes road connectivity between major cities in the south and 
north extremely costly (for example, total transport costs to a large city are US$20 to 
US$50 per ton, despite relatively short distances).25 Travel times are also quite high (for 
example, it can take five days to travel the 1,400 kilometers from Mogadishu to Bosaso) 
owing to the dilapidated state of the country’s road infrastructure.26 Finally, Somalia 
is not well connected by roads to its neighbors,27 restricting the role of the country in 
trade integration within the region and limiting the potential economic growth that 
could result from it. Efforts to resolve these issues are constrained by Somalia’s security 
challenges, limited fiscal space, lack of institutional capacity, and governance challenges. 
In this context, development institutions are providing ongoing support to FGS and 
FMS in the preparation of a range of roadwork interventions aimed to improve major 
corridors and secondary and tertiary roads.
The logistics sector is characterized by market distortions
The political economy has led to oligopolistic dynamics and barriers to entry in the 
logistics sector. The transporters of livestock and other goods that transformed into 
logistics contractors in post-independence Somalia during the 1960s not only benefited 
from a first-mover advantage but also were able to leverage their influence to negotiate 
power in relation to the Somali state during that decade.28 The power amassed by these 
firms allowed them to withstand efforts by the Siyad Barre regime to regulate their 
industry.29 It also has enabled these firms to grow their power significantly since then, 
with the logistics economy becoming increasingly cartelized30 and logistics firms gaining 
control over entire supply chains.31 Furthermore, lead logistics firms have developed 
political clientelism networks, which they have used to protect their position from 
policies intended to exert more political control over the logistics economy.32 In this 
context, transport is de facto self-regulated33 and there is very limited competition in the 
trucking industry—throughout Somalia but especially in the country’s South-West and 
Central regions. Accordingly, margins for transport operators have become extremely 
high,34 with truckers earning income that is many multiples higher than that provided by 
similar labor opportunities in many regions of Somalia.35
=== PAGE 74 ===
|  52  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Weak governance and nascent low-capacity institutions aggravate 
issues with market distortions and transport infrastructure
At present, the Somali government has limited stewardship capability in transport 
and logistics. National institutions in the sector are either weak or nascent. Although 
the Somalia National Highway Authority and Somali Ports Authority are officially 
established, they are yet to be operationalized at scale. The Ministry of Public Works, 
Reconstruction, and Housing; the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation; the 
Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport; and the Somali Civil Aviation Authority also 
often lack the resources, capacity, and analytical foundations to adequately plan for or 
implement the sector’s development.36 As a result, higher-level strategy and standards 
setting in transport and logistics; planning and execution of road rehabilitation 
and maintenance; and cohesive national development of maritime transport, air 
liberalization, and other relevant policy areas are often underdeveloped and currently 
at a standstill.37 Relatedly, there is no national regulation in the transport sector 
outside of that for aviation. Ports operate in a relatively independent fashion, and land 
transport regulation is largely missing (with logistics stakeholders often functioning 
in a regulatory vacuum) but when present varies substantially by FMS. There are 
considerable regulatory gaps that constrain inter-FMS transit and commerce, including 
an absent unified database of vehicles and drivers.
4.2	 DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY
Ongoing reforms continue to improve digital connectivity in Somalia while further 
efforts are needed to close the remaining regional gaps. The country’s adoption of 
mobile communications has increased significantly in recent decades (figures 4.3 and 
4.4).38 Mobile network services have also become substantially more affordable through 
low voice and data rates, enabling low-income Somalis to communicate more easily.39 
These developments have had a series of positive spillovers to the country’s economy 
(for example, mobile money services have become the dominant retail payment 
instrument in Somalia)40 and have played an important role in assisting individuals in 
rural areas, where poverty is more prevalent. However, broadband penetration and use 
of internet bandwidth remain low in comparison to regional peers (figure 4.5), limiting 
the potential digital dividends of the mobile connectivity Somalia has achieved in 
recent decades.41 This situation results from both supply-side issues (such as the state of 
Somalia’s telecom infrastructure and market structure) and demand-side issues (such as 
digital literacy, limited disposable income, and gender bias).
The state of broadband infrastructure constrains internet adoption
First-mile broadband infrastructure has developed remarkably well in recent decades. 
Starting in 2012, a wide range of private mobile companies using satellites for 
international communications have emerged in Somalia, and mobile telecommunications 
operators have launched services across the country.42 International fiber-optic 
connectivity has also improved with the proliferation of submarine fiber-optic cables 
landing on Somalia’s shores and the potential exchange of backup capacity resulting 
from this infrastructure.43
=== PAGE 75 ===
|  53  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
64.39
10.12
1.66
0.24
0.21
0.03
0.02
Kenya
Djibouti
Uganda
Ethiopia
Tanzania
S. Sudan
Somalia
Source: 	 World Bank World Development Indicators, taken 
from International Telecommunication Union World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database.
Source: 	 International Telecommunication Union,  
https://www.itu.int/itu-d/sites/statistics/ .
FIGURE 4.3  MOBILE CELLULAR SUSCRIPTIONS, 
SOMALIA, 2000-22
FIGURE 4.4  TOTAL USED CAPACITY OF  
INTERNATIONAL BANDWIDTH, SOMALIA  
AND COMPARATORS, 2017 
Per 100 inhabitants
Mbps per 1,000 inhabitants
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
59.0
1.9
35.6
1.4
26.9
0.5
18.3
2.2
28.6
2.5
0.7
Kenya
Djibouti
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Somalia
Source: 	 International Telecommunication Union, https://www.itu.int/itu-d/sites/statistics/ .
FIGURE 4.5  PERCENT OF INDIVIDUALS USING BROADBAND, SOMALIA AND 
COMPARATORS, 2022
Per 100 inhabitants
Mobile broadband subscriptions          Fixed broadband subscription
=== PAGE 76 ===
|  54  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Source: 	 World Bank Digital Development Team, 2023.
Note: 	
Existing fiber-optic backbone is in green. The nec-
essary (but not yet existing) fiber-optic backbone of 
different priorities is in red, blue, yellow, and brown.
Source: 	 World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa  
“Initiative DE4A Report, World Bank, Washington, DC, 
2022).
FIGURE 4.6 MAP OF TERRESTRIAL FIBER-OPTIC 
BACKBONE NETWORK, 2022
FIGURE 4.7 MAP OF MICROWAVE LINK  
NETWORK, 2016
Large gaps in Somalia’s middle- and last-mile network infrastructure constitute a major 
bottleneck to uptake of broadband services among Somalis. Somalia’s domestic fiber-
optic backbone network remains underdeveloped in most of its territory for a range of 
reasons, including security problems in south and central Somalia. Composed of three 
highly fragmented regional backbone networks44 with missing terrestrial fiber trunks or 
switches, Somalia’s domestic fiber-optic backbone network is not integrated. The result 
is three distinct markets that operate virtually independently (figure 4.6), with terrestrial 
fiber-optic backbone networks in Somaliland, parts of Puntland, and Mogadishu that 
are unable to benefit from any sort of redundancy. Vast portions of Somali territory—
especially in its southern and central regions—remain unconnected and rely on the use 
of microwave links (figure 4.7), which have limited transmission capacity and quality. 
Fixed last-mile broadband connection development in Somalia is also very limited 
(despite recent deployments of metropolitan fiber); there is a broadband penetration of 
less than 1 percent of households.45 Wireless fourth-generation (4G) coverage is limited 
to Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and a few other major cities; third-generation (3G) coverage 
has reached only some small cities; and most of the broadband connectivity in the 
country is mobile. Existing broadband networks also often suffer from low broadband 
speed and high call drop rates.46 Latency and cost for operators is also higher than it 
should be47 because the internet exchange point that was established in Somalia in 2018 
(the Somali Internet Exchange Point) has remained largely inactive owing to its status as 
a nonneutral carrier facility.
Existing
Priority 1
Priority 2
Priority 3
Priority 4
      Landing 
      station
=== PAGE 77 ===
|  55  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
Underdeveloped institutional and regulatory frameworks and market 
distortions hamper attempts to further develop digital connectivity in 
Somalia
Despite recent regulatory and institutional milestones, the sector requires more effective 
government stewardship to address the remaining gaps. Some disputes in the sector 
continue to be settled using a mix of Xeer and Sharia legal mechanisms.48 The creation 
of the National Communications Authority in 2018 and the adoption of new legislation 
and regulations (for example, the Communications Act of 2017 and the 2020 Unified 
Licensing Framework regulation) have paved the way for formalizing and regulating the 
ICT sector—such as in adoption of universal licensing. However, the implementation of 
these institutional and regulatory frameworks is advancing at a slow pace.49 The country’s 
licensing framework is complex and unclear and requires harmonization. Licensing fees 
are high compared to those of other countries in the region.50 Gaps continue to exist in 
areas such as infrastructure sharing, quality of service, consumer protection, numbering 
assignments and number portability, cybersecurity, and data protection. Drafted 
regulations do not properly address competition issues; no regulation deters firms from 
colluding to allocate markets and customers or from rigging bids.
Taking advantage of regulatory and institutional gaps, some private sector operators 
have gained dominant positions in the sector—creating a market structure that is 
limiting competitive behavior and the expansion of digital connectivity. Although the 
National ICT Policy Strategy (adopted by Somalia’s Ministry of Communications and 
Technology in 2019) aims to support development of an open and competitive digital 
market, this still has not been achieved. At the moment, the ICT market continues 
to be primarily composed of oligopolies that lean toward vertical market integration 
across sites,51 control subregional markets, and jointly dominate ICT services in the 
country (figure 4.8). This market structure leads to a range of issues.52 The requirement 
for mobile network operators (that is, Homuud, Telecoms, Golis, Sometel, Amtel 
and Somlink) to interconnect is likely to increase competition, but compliance with 
these measures remains limited. The market also continues to be plagued by a series 
of distortions. For example, (a) the informal rules according to which distribution of 
radio frequency spectrums is managed in Somalia limit availability of radio frequencies 
to new entrants and to smaller firms looking to roll out their networks; (b) very high 
termination charges distort markets among interconnected mobile network operators; 
(c) leading ICT firms refuse to share infrastructure that would reduce the cost of 
infrastructure deployment; (d) there is limited competition in markets for long-distance 
fixed connectivity because there is only one independent long-distance operator in each 
region (other than Somaliland); and (e) broadband services appear to be subsidized by 
mobile money businesses of the same conglomerate,53 keeping prices artificially low and 
preventing effective competition. Furthermore, the fact that the operators are vertically 
integrated across sites raises significant barriers to entry, such that a new entrant would 
need to build a network over the entire value chain.
=== PAGE 78 ===
|  56  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Demand issues constrain the growth of digital connectivity in Somalia
Addressing demand-side barriers is also critical to fully addressing digital connectivity 
challenges in Somalia. Although there is a lack of information on the main demand-side 
constraints that undergird low broadband usage in Somalia, there are some issues that 
have been highlighted in consultations and development institution reports. These 
include (a) limited purchasing power of the population,54 (b) high costs of smart 
broadband-compatible devices, and (c) Somalia’s lack of a series of building blocks that 
are necessary for digital development—such as digital skills, which are very limited.
4.3	 ACCESS TO WATER
Access to water is problematic and continues to inhibit economic development in 
Somalia. Despite recent progress to improve access to water in Somalia, in 2022, only 
77.7 percent and 74.7 percent of households had access to improved water sources 
during Somalia’s rainy and dry seasons, respectively, with an even lower proportion of 
the population having access to safely managed drinking water.55 Rural, nomadic, and 
internally displaced person (IDP) populations fared even worse.56 According to World 
Bank studies, in 2018–19, an estimated 43 percent of established urban firms57 and 
a large proportion of rural firms58 also experienced water insufficiencies, with gender 
dimension to water scarcity.59 Furthermore, there are sizable concerns over water 
quality in the country. Economic activities that need reliable access to high-quality water 
48.2
19.0
0.1
0.8
2.0
0.9
16.2
12.8
Source: 	 TMG Telecom and APTelecom, based on Global System for Mobile Communications 
Association intelligence.
Note: 	
Providers in blue have south-Central Somalia as their main coverage area. Those in 
gray have Somaliland as their main coverage area. Puntland is serviced primarily by 
Golis (in black). The providers in pink have a national coverage area, although they are 
much smaller than other providers.
FIGURE 4.8 MOBILE MARKET SHARE BY PROVIDER, 2021
Percentage
Hormuud
Somnet
Somlink
Telesom
Somtel
Golis
Amtel
Nationlink
100%
=== PAGE 79 ===
|  57  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
have been progressively constrained in recent decades. In this context, rural livelihoods 
are under threat, with crop production depending on an increasingly dry arid and semi-
arid resource base; year-round available and affordable quality livestock feed is also 
gradually becoming scarcer.60 A much-needed economic diversification in urban areas is 
also limited by scarce access to quality water and by high water tariffs.61
Somalia should have sufficient long-term renewable groundwater and 
surface runoff resources to meet water demands—if water is efficiently 
managed and allocated
Water scarcity is prevalent in some regions in Somalia. Most of Somalia is characterized 
as arid and semi-arid, with high interannual variability of rainfall. The Shebelle and the 
Jubba are Somalia’s only two permanent rivers. Springs often disappear downstream 
because of evaporation, infiltration, and water withdrawals, and water from deep 
aquifers is costly to extract and often unsuitable for drinking or irrigation. Drought and 
inconsistent rainfalls are also increasingly frequent. Despite the country’s extraction 
of groundwater supply, water is scarce in some regions of Somalia. The Benaadir 
region around Mogadishu has a level of water scarcity that is very high; this scarcity is 
increasing at a particularly fast pace because of a combination of low water production 
and growing water demand fueled by forced displacement. There are also serious 
concerns that significant water shortages will increase in the short to midterm, with 
an estimated 30 to 40 towns likely to become water scarce given the current rate of 
urbanization in the country.62 However, according to recent modeling that incorporates 
water needs,63 most regions in Somalia have sufficient long-term renewable groundwater 
and surface runoff resources to meet water demand without significantly affecting 
environmental flows.64
The state of water infrastructure and a nascent institutional and regulatory environment 
result in compromised efficiency of water supply in rural, urban, and peri-urban areas. 
Most of the water infrastructure that was built after the 1920s to control and harness 
variable river flows in Somalia has been destroyed, looted, or neglected since the 
civil war. More than half of controlled and flood-recession irrigation schemes are no 
longer functioning,65 and most of those that do function are in poor condition.66 River 
infrastructure (such as dams and barrages) on the Shebelle and Jubba rivers are in very 
poor shape.67 Surface water storage barely exists in Somalia and (where it is available) 
is subject to high levels of evaporation.68 Although the availability of small-scale 
infrastructure for multiuse water harvesting and storage has improved recently, rural 
infrastructure to collect rainfall and access groundwater also remains unreliable and 
inadequate.69 Annual yields and operational expenditure of existing infrastructure also 
remain high.70 In theory, the water sector in Somalia has a comprehensive multigovernance 
framework.71 In practice, the institutional and regulatory framework for water service 
provision is underdeveloped. For example, Somalia’s water law needs an overhaul in 
order for it to reflect the existing system. The water sector also continues to be fragmented 
and ineffective, with a nebulous distinction of roles and responsibilities. Despite recent 
initiatives, there is also a scarcity of data on water; this constrains the development of 
comprehensive policies for the sector—especially on urban water delivery.72 In particular, 
water governance mechanisms in urban settings, the role of emerging water utilities 
in urban regions (such as contracting modalities and financing sources), urban water 
consumption for commercial and industrial users, and current mechanisms for large-scale
=== PAGE 80 ===
|  58  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
extraction and storage of water are all topics on which further information is needed. 
There is also a shortfall of adequately trained personnel and of technical instruments 
across all functional domains, which has not improved because of the limited financial 
resources available to government entities in the sector. These shortcomings diminish the 
coordinative, oversight, and monitoring capacity of federal and state ministries (such as in 
the setting of tariffs and the standardization of processes for approval of construction and 
operation of water resources).73
The prevalence of water service delivery that is led by loosely regulated 
nonstate actors with limited government coordination contributes to 
constrained access to water in Somalia
Community-led water service delivery in rural regions is often inefficient and 
inequitable. Water provision in rural areas has been primarily community-led for many 
decades, with local committees forming to facilitate and monitor projects funded by 
development institutions. However, in practice, water points often fall closer to being 
private assets, with individuals (such as lineages of village heads) claiming ownership 
of them.74 Watering lists and queuing rules that regulate access to water are not 
always equitable, and water committee leaders collude and engage in rent-seeking 
behavior. This goes mostly unchecked because of very limited enforcement of the 
roles and responsibilities of water committees, a lack of ongoing external support and 
monitoring, and the existence of information asymmetries between committees and 
the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR).75 Operation and maintenance 
of water points is also inefficient because capacity building of water committees is 
often hasty and irregularities in revenue collection may lead to deficiencies of funds for 
operational expenses and repairs.76
In urban settings, the lack of regulation of private water markets is one of the primary 
drivers of limited access to quality water. In the early 2000s, private companies started 
leveraging water investments by development institutions to drill boreholes in the 
outskirts of towns and to establish a reticulation of mini pipe networks for delivery77 
in an effort to fill the gaps left by Somalia’s destroyed public water infrastructure. This 
has led to a water supply and delivery system in urban and peri-urban areas that is 
generally controlled by private companies—ranging from large quasiwater utilities to 
small individual water entrepreneurs.78 Some companies and hotels also have their own 
boreholes; truck owners, middlemen, and water sellers (such as donkey cart operators) 
buy and distribute water purchased from a range of sources (including bottled water 
imports).79 These stakeholders form part of a range of private sector–led water markets. 
For example, the water market in Borama is a monopoly, with only one company 
providing water. Beledweyne is home to 25 water providers. Other urban centers, 
such as Baidoa, Bosaso, Galkayo, and Mogadishu are controlled by oligopolies.80 In 
all of these urban water supply ecosystems, governments are virtually absent.81 Some 
government entities are minor partners in water PPPs, and most issue licenses and collect 
fees, but government oversight and monitoring is generally contested, fragmented, and 
ineffective, leading to de facto self-regulated private water delivery sectors that are often 
characterized by anticompetitive behaviors and price fixing.82 In consequence, although 
large Somali firms can often negotiate discounted water rates, urban water prices are 
usually exorbitant, burdening most urban households and firms.83 There are also no 
standardized processes for the construction and operation of water resources in Somalia; 
this affects the quality of water provision across the country.
=== PAGE 81 ===
|  59  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
4.4	 EDUCATION AND SKILLS FOR JOBS
A mismatch between labor demand and labor supply hampers private sector 
development in Somalia. It is estimated that more than 80 percent of the educated elite 
in Somalia left the country between 1991 and 2008.84 Although some educated diaspora 
Somalis have returned in the past decade,85 the Somali labor force is characterized by 
deficient skills. Unemployed Somalis cite inadequate skills as one of the main barriers 
to finding a job, especially among the poor, youth, and nonurban populations (figure 
4.9). Jobs that need vocational skills (such as carpentry and welding) are often left 
unoccupied.86 However, a majority of urban firms report that employees’ skills meet 
or exceed their business needs (figure 4.10) for jobs that do not require managerial 
or foreign language skills.87 There is a clear mismatch between the skills possessed by 
Somali workers and those needed by employers; this is primarily a result of (a) the 
problems of the Somalia formal education system, (b) the deficiencies of technical and 
vocational education and training (TVET) and nonformal education, and (c) labor 
market frictions that hinder matching jobseekers with job openings.
100
80
60
40
20
0
Overall
Mogadishu
Other urban
Rural
IDPS in settlements
Nomads
Poor
Non poor
Female
Male
Age 15-24
Age 25-64
Interpersonal  
skills
Foreign 
language  
skills
Problem 
solving  
skills
Technical  
skills
Computer 
or IT  
skills
Managerial 
skills
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on the Somali 
High-Frequency Survey 2017—18. Taken from Wendy 
Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and  
Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 
2021).
Note: 	
IDPs = internally displaced persons.
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on the World 
Bank 2019 Somalia Enterprise Surveys in Mogadishu 
and Bosaso. Taken from Wendy Karamba, Improving 
Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia  
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
Note:	
 IT = information technology.
FIGURE 4.9 MOBILE CELLULAR SUSCRIPTIONS, 
SOMALIA, 2000-21
FIGURE 4.10 LEVELS OF SKILLED EMPLOYEES IN 
URBAN FIRMS BY TYPES OF FIRMS, 2019
% of unemployed population
% of surveyed firms
Lack of/inadequate skills      Lack of information about local labor market 
Lack of/limited work opportunities      Other        
Below required          As required           Above required
Bosaso
Mogadishu
Bosaso
Mogadishu
Bosaso
Mogadishu
Bosaso
Mogadishu
Bosaso
Mogadishu
Bosaso
Mogadishu
=== PAGE 82 ===
|  60  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Despite recent progress, the Somali formal education system has a 
wide range of problems
Somalia has one of the lowest levels of formal education in the world. School 
participation in the country is extremely low. The primary gross enrollment ratio (GER) 
in Somalia ranges from 9 percent to 30 percent, which is considerably lower than the 99 
percent average GER in Sub-Saharan Africa and the 96 percent average in fragile and 
conflict-affected countries.88 The number of out-of-school children in the country is even 
higher at the secondary level, with a GER that ranges from 12 percent to 15 percent, 
compared to 44 percent and 46 percent in Sub-Saharan African and FCV countries, 
respectively (figure 4.11).89 Tertiary education is highly uncommon, especially among 
the poorest Somalis.90 Rural students face a situation that is even more dire, with one-
third of the 93 school districts in Somalia (which are mostly rural) having an average 
GER of less than 10 percent. Rural Somalis’ rate of tertiary education attendance is 
less than 3 percent. Women are worse off, with girls receiving an average of only 1.48 
years of schooling compared to 1.95 years for boys (see box 4.1).91 The quality of 
education in the country also appears to be subpar: the 2018 Early Grade Mathematics 
Assessment and Early Grade Reading Assessment, as well as a more recent study in 
schools in south and central Somalia92 identified very low learning levels in literacy, 
English literacy, and mathematics among the few children who do go to school (figure 
4.12). Given these primary and secondary education outcomes, the pipeline to tertiary 
education in Somalia is largely nonexistent. Although there are 118 higher education 
institutions operating in the country (of which 41 are officially recognized),93 it is 
calculated that the GER for tertiary education is only 4.8 percent.94 It is estimated that 
more than 96 percent of Somalis have no higher education.95
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: 	 Federal Government of Somalia and STATcompiler, Demographic and Health Survey. 
FIGURE 4.11 ACCESS TO EDUCATION COMPARED WITH PEER COUNTRIES, 
2020
Net school attendance ratio
Primary          Secondary    
Primary          Secondary    
Somalia 2019
Liberia 2013
Chad 2014
Senegal 2019
Mali 2018
Guinea 2018
Ethiopia 2016
Afghanistan 2015
Tanzania 2015
Benin 2017
Mozambique 2015
Uganda 2016
Gambia, the 2013
Ghana 2014
Burundi 2016
Malawi 2015
Kenya 2014
Zambia 2018
Rwanda 2015
Congo, Dem. Rep. 2013
Cameroon 2018
Sierra Leone 2019
Togo 2013
Zimbabwe 2015
=== PAGE 83 ===
|  61  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
100
50
0
Source: 	 Charles Wafula and Godfrey Mulongo, “Are Children in South and Central Somalia  
Accessing Education, and Are They Learning? Baseline Information,” Social Sciences and 
Humanities Open 2, no. 1 (2020).
Note: 	
EGRA = Early Grade Reading Assessment; EGMA = Early Grade Mathematics  
Assessment.
FIGURE 4.12 RESULTS OF 2018 EARLY GRADE MATH AND READING  
ASSESSMENTS IN SOMALIA
Percentage of students at level
 Overall	
Female	
       Male
EGRA (Somali)
 Overall	
Female	
       Male
EGRA (English)
 Overall	
Female	
       Male
EGMA
Grade 5          Grade 6          Grade 7
BOX 4.1 EDUCATION GENDER GAPS IN SOMALIA
Education of women is severely constrained 
in Somalia. Gender gaps in school attendance are 
linked to a series of demand and supply-side factors. 
They include poverty, long distances from homes to 
schools, preferential treatment of males, and various 
social norms entrenched in Somalia’s patriarchal 
society (including social pressures for early marriage, 
expectations that girls support households, and 
caregiving).a The shortage of female teachers in the 
countryb and the belief that only men should continue 
to advanced levels of education also lead to a low 
uptake of education services by girls. These factors 
reduce the pipeline of young women prepared for 
higher education (figure B5.1.1) and prevent otherwise 
prepared women from enrolling and remaining in 
tertiary education institutions (figure B5.1.2). The lack 
of market-relevant skills, which hinders transition to 
the labor market, is also particularly frequent among 
women. Although an estimated 44 percent of youth 
(between the ages of 15 and 24) are not in education, 
employment, or training (NEET) in Somalia, the 
NEET rate is particularly high for young women: 
50 percent of all females between the ages of 15 
and 24, compared to 39 percent of males.c Recent 
consultations suggest that basic skills are a primary 
constraint to women with respect to labor market 
engagement and financial independence.d
a.	
Federal Government of Somalia, Education Sector Analysis: Assessing Opportunities for Rebuilding the Country through  
Education (UNESCO Office for Africa, International Institute for Educational Planning, Dakar, Senegal, 2022).
b.	
For more information, see World Bank, Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (Project Appraisal 
Document, PAD3788, May 24, 2021); and World Bank, “Rapid Survey of Selected Somali HEIs,” December 2022.
c.	
According to the Somalia Labor Force Survey, cited in: World Bank, “Somalia Empowering Women through Education  
and Skills Project – ‘Rajo Kaaba’ Project” (Project Appraisal Document, PAD4863, June 2022).
d.	
World Bank, “Somalia Empowering Women.”
=== PAGE 84 ===
|  62  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Source: 	 Somalia Health and Demographic Survey, 2020. Taken from: World Bank, “Somalia Empowering Women 
Through Education and Skills ‘Rajo Kaaba’ Project” (Project Appraisal Document, PAD4863, June 2022).
FIGURE B4.1.2 PERCENTAGE OF SOMALI POPULATION BY AGE GROUP THAT ATTENDED 
HIGHER EDUCATION, 2020
% of population
20
16
12
8
4
0
Male        Female
 15-19 years
20-24 years
25-29 years
30-34 years
35-39 years
40-44 years
45-49 years
50-54 years
55-59 years
60-64 years
65+ 
25
20
15
10
5
0
Male        Female
FIGURE B4.1.1   INTAKE RATES: PRIMARY TO SECONDARY IN EACH GRADE (OR FORM) BY 
SEX, 2022
% of population
10
11
11
11
11
10
13
12
13
13
14
16
17
15
14
14
15
14
18
19
16
15
17
20
Source: 	 Federal Government of Somalia, Education Sector Analysis: Assessing Opportunities for Rebuilding the  
Country through Education (UNESCO Office for Africa, International Institute for Educational Planning,  
Dakar, Senegal, 2022).
Grade	
Grade	
Grade	
Grade	
Grade	
Grade	
Grade	
Grade
    1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
Primary
Form 1          Form 2          Form 3            Form 4
Secondary
=== PAGE 85 ===
|  63  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
The marginal role of the Somali public education system in a sector that is still 
dominated by nonstate schools is a key driver of poor education outcomes in the 
country. Somalia spent only 5 percent of its budget on education in 2020, which 
translates to about 0.25 percent of total GDP.96 This level of public financing is 
insufficient to support even core functions of education institutions (such as payment of 
teachers).97 Nonstate actors have become the primary provider of education in Somalia 
following the civil war.98 These nonstate actors are primarily private entities,99 although 
they also include local communities, international donors and nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), umbrella associations,100 and integrated Koranic schools.101 
These nonstate actors lack effective oversight and stewardship from the public sector. 
Despite notable progress in education policy and program development by federal 
and state governments, uniformity is missing on curriculums, education cycles, 
languages of instruction, and learning standards. Most school funding comes from 
school fees, even in public schools.102 Only members of households that can afford 
school—through income, remittances, or assistance from humanitarian or development 
partners—can get an education. Schools are also rarely developed in geographic areas 
where a market-based mechanism cannot be established (for example, regions with 
high poverty levels or those prone to shocks and violence). As such, large parts of the 
country remain underserved. The country’s teaching force is also ill-qualified, with no 
uniform preservice teacher training curriculum in the country; there is also a scarcity of 
professional development programs for teachers.
A strengthened technical and vocational education and training system 
could help close the skills gap in Somalia
Although a solid TVET system in Somalia could equip its citizens with the knowledge 
and skills needed to thrive in the country’s economy, existing TVET systems are 
largely deficient in the country. There is a strong demand in Somalia for technical, 
vocational, and other types of nonformal education, which are currently missing. 
(figure 4.13). Some of the issues that afflict TVET systems are external, such as the 
lack of foundational skills. However, Somalia’s TVET system is in its infancy, with 
current TVET centers unable to give trainees the knowledge and skills needed to 
transition smoothly into the workforce in their chosen careers. Although there have 
been at least 129 TVET centers established around Somalia,103 TVET education receives 
comparatively fewer public resources than other types of education, leading to a 
scarcity of TVET centers across the Somali territory and making those that exist almost 
completely dependent on ad hoc, short-term donor project financing.104 A mere 14,000 
people have enrolled in TVET institutions in Somalia since they have been available.105 
TVET centers usually have inadequate infrastructure (such as a lack of fully equipped 
laboratories, workshops, and classrooms), a scarcity of training textbooks, and an even 
more severe shortage of qualified teachers than that of formal education institutions.106 
A missing comprehensive qualification framework for TVET is also an issue.107 Somalia’s 
TVET system is not demand driven because private sector businesses are not sufficiently 
involved in steering it,108 leading to a situation in which TVET providers deliver training 
that is not always practical, relevant, or useful for enhancing the employability of 
trainees.109 This situation is also exacerbated by the lack of incentives for private sector 
enterprises to provide apprenticeship opportunities110 and by inadequate data collection 
on the TVET system, which hampers understanding of specific workforce needs in 
different industries.111 Consequently, the few Somalis that have graduated from TVET 
institutions often struggle to find employment, and may end up in informal jobs.
=== PAGE 86 ===
|  64  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Labor market frictions depress labor market dynamics and affect job 
transitions
Matching jobseekers with job openings is hindered by job market frictions in Somalia. 
Search frictions and information imperfections caused by societal preferences and 
norms are typical in the Somali labor market. Given the lack of credibility of TVET 
systems in Somalia, prospective employers tend to prioritize hiring graduates from 
higher education institutions with recognized credentials. This hiring practice may 
result in a discrepancy between job requirements and the skills available in the 
workforce. Gender segregation into traditionally male and female fields and strong 
cultural associations between traditional clans and specific professions also affect the 
job market,112 with societal norms perpetuating gender imbalances in training programs 
and the workforce and inhibiting the full utilization of existing talent and skills in the 
country. Similarly, certain types of manual labor are viewed as low status in Somalia, 
leading unemployed individuals—however unskilled—to reject these kinds of jobs.113 
Furthermore, job openings are usually not advertised publicly, with employers hiring 
primarily through personal connections.114 This marginalizes not only minority clans, 
but also marginalized groups (for example, IDPs, women, and those who are poor) 
that are more likely to lack these connections and are thus usually unable to find 
information about jobs.115 Even when candidates from these groups become aware of 
job openings, some employers exclude them from consideration because of their lack 
of social networks.116 These issues with matching jobseekers with job openings have a 
negative influence on the country’s ability to make use of existing skill sets for private 
sector development.117
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on the Somali High-Frequency Survey 2017–18. 
Taken from World Bank, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in  
Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
Note: 	
IDP = internally displaced person.
FIGURE 4.13 TRAINING NEEDS ACCORDING TO UNEMPLOYED SOMALIS, 
2017–18
Technical/vocational skills          Complete education       
Business start up training           Loan/grant           Other       
Overall
Mogadishu
Other urban
Rural
IDPS in settlements
Nomads
Poor
Non poor
Female
Male
Age 15-24
Age 25-64
% of unemployed population
=== PAGE 87 ===
|  65  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
4.5	 ACCESS TO BUSINESS SERVICES
The need for business services is elevated in the Somali private sector. A large 
proportion of unemployed Somalis indicate that they need training and financing to 
start a business.118 Established businesses also seem to have a high need for business 
development services (BDS). According to recent data collection by the World Bank on 
the demand for BDS by MSMEs in Somalia,119 more than 90 percent of surveyed firms 
indicated that BDS services are critical for the success of their firms. The type of BDS 
required varies by size of firm, economic sector, and the gender and education level of 
the owner, but the perceived importance of BDS is consistent across types of firms.
The entrepreneurship support ecosystem in Somalia is growing but remains nascent 
compared to more advanced regional peers. The number of entrepreneurship support 
organizations (ESOs) in the country has increased considerably in recent years—
primarily in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Garowe.120 A few of those ESOs have good 
capacity and adequate infrastructure (such as coworking spaces), as well as strong core 
teams, a wide network of mentors, and close collaboration through frequent cohosting 
of and participation in entrepreneurship events (for example, the Mogadishu Tech 
Summit).121 However, the ecosystem remains nascent in comparison to more advanced 
ecosystems in the Sub-Saharan Africa region (such as Kenya’s). Current outreach 
(300–500 beneficiaries per year) is unlikely to have much of an impact on private sector 
development. This is especially true because there is little evidence that entrepreneurial 
ventures supported by ESOs have been able to scale up.122 The ESO ecosystem is 
also primarily dominated by incubators, with only a few accelerator programs, angel 
investors, or hybrid model organizations,123 some of which lack clarity on the support 
that should be provided by an incubator.124 Most ESOs also lack specialization, 
providing undifferentiated services that focus almost solely on enterprise development 
skills.125 Finally, most ESOs do not charge any fees for their programs, which hinders 
their sustainability.126
Demand and supply of commercial business services in the country are also extremely 
weak. Access to professional services is very limited in Somalia, making it challenging 
for firms to improve business administration functions (such as accounting), engage in 
and enforce contracts, and access data and market information.127 Supply of training 
and technical business support also remains limited. Most existing BDS providers 
have significant capacity gaps, provide their services through informal personal 
networks, and lack a physical place of business.128 Most existing commercial business 
service providers do not have a track record of creating value for clients, leading to 
a minimal demand for these services.129 Donor-funded business development service 
organizations130 have also had only mixed results; they often have sustainability issues 
and are geographically concentrated in large cities.131
=== PAGE 88 ===
|  66  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Notes
1.         Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development, “Case Studies: Delivering Inclusive Growth through Infrastructure  
            Programming in FCAS—Somalia—Building Infrastructure in a ‘Failed State’” (UK Department for International Development, 2019).
2.	
Consultations with government and private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, August 2023; Peter Middlebrook, Hussein Siad, 
and Hussein Haji Mao, “Somalia Vision for Private Sector Development Report” (Working Paper 5, National Economic Council 
of Somalia, Mogadishu, December 2019).
3.	
The CPSD evaluated a list of high-potential sectors and short-listed these sectors using a filtering framework consisting of 
three criteria: (a) desirability, (b) feasibility, and (c) value addition. 
4.	
World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum—Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
5.	
World Bank, Somalia Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (Project Appraisal Document, PAD 4464, Washington, DC: 
World Bank, September 9, 2022).
6.	
African Development Bank (AfDB), Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme (Abidjan, Côte D’Ivoire: 
AfDB, 2016).
7.	
Data collection for the World Bank “Kaalkaal” project. 
8.	
AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme. 
9.	
A study commissioned by the African Union Commission in 2020 established that Somalia contributed only 316,000 
passengers in traffic per year within the African Union. According to the AfDB, Somalia’s ratio of passenger movement to 
urban population is 0.13; this can be compared to that of Kenya, which has a ratio of 0.81.
10.	
AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
11.	
Consultations with government and private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, 2023.
12.	
For example, airlines (a) need to pay a premium to pilots and crew to go to Somalia and (b) are required to obtain a special 
permit from regulatory authorities because the country is considered a hostile destination. For more details, see Daisy 
Carrington, “Flying into Hostile Territory: Somalia Experiences Boom in Air Travel,” CNN, 2013.
13.	
Long-term concession agreements were provided to DP World for the management of the maritime ports of Berbera and 
Bosaso, and a concession agreement was signed with Albayrak (of Türkiye) for the management of the maritime port in 
Mogadishu.
14.	
AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme.
15.	
The World Bank transport team was not allowed to visit the ports of Kismayo and others, and the existing port master plan 
was elaborated remotely.
16.	
For a detailed analysis of the weaknesses of port facilities in Somalia, see Inros Lackner SE, HEFI, and Africa Enablers GmBH, 
Port Master Plan—Final Report (Ministry of Finance of the Federal Republic of Somalia, December 2017). Concession 
agreements might be relevant to the performance of maritime ports because they would define who is responsible for the 
maintenance and operation of different types of infrastructure. Unfortunately, although a process to review the terms of the 
concession of the port in Mogadishu is ongoing, development institutions have not had access to the concession terms for 
the ports in Berbera and Bosaso.
17.	
AfDB, “Somalia Road Infrastructure Program—Appraisal Report” (AfDB, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, July 2019).
18.	
CMA CGM is the third largest container shipping company in the world, with presence in 160 countries; it operates 257 
shipping lines. 
19	
AfDB, Somalia Transport Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme, 2016.
20.	
As established in Thomas Cantens, Somalia: Assessment of Customs Revenue Potential and Proposals for Reform (World Customs 
Organization Research Unit, World Bank Somalia Governance Program with support from the UK Department for 
International Development, 2018). 
21.	
There is anecdotal evidence that shadow taxes are paid in ports (mostly to Al-Shabaab) that are often larger than taxes paid 
to the Somali government.
22.	
AfDB, “Somalia Road Infrastructure Program.” 
23.	
AfDB, “Bank Group Country Brief 2017–2020” (AfDB, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, September 2017).
24.	
World Bank, SDG indicator 9.1.1., Rural Access Index, https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/rural-access-index-rai. 
25.	
World Bank, Somalia Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project.
26.	
Inros Lackner SE, HEFI, and Africa Enablers GmBH, Port Master Plan—Final Report, Ministry of Finance of the Federal Republic 
of Somalia, December 2017; SDG 9.1.1. Rural Access Index, https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/rural-access-index-rai.
27.	
Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development, Case Studies.” The only established corridor from Somalia’s coast to a 
neighboring country is that linking the port of Berbera in Somaliland to Tog Wajaale on the border with Ethiopia.
=== PAGE 89 ===
|  67  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
28.	
Claire Elder, “Logistics Contracts and the Political Economy of State Failure: Evidence from Somalia,” African Affairs 121, no. 484, 
(July 2022): 395–417.
29.	
Roland Marchal, The Post Civil War Somali Business Class (Nairobi, Kenya: European Commission Somalia Unit, 1996).
30.	
Claire Elder, “Logistics Contracts and the Political Economy of State Failure: Evidence from Somalia,” African Affairs, 121, no. 
484, (July 2022): 395–417; and Claire Elder, “Somaliland’s Authoritarian Turn: Oligarchic–Corporate Power and the Political 
Economy of de Facto States,” International Affairs 97, no. 6, (2021): 1749–65.
31.	
Jatin Dua, “Ambergris, Livestock, and Oil: Port-Making as Chokepoint Making in the Red Sea,” Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology, 
88, no. 2 (2020).
32.	
Claire Elder, “Logistics Contracts.” 
33.	
Tobias Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities—Urbanization and Public Goods in Somalia” (Rift Valley Institute, Nairobi, Kenya, 
2020).
34.	
According to an assessment by World Bank staff for the 2021 Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, estimated margins of 
transport operators potentially exceed 50 percent of transport prices. 
35.	
A. K. Jama, “A Comparative Analysis of Public Private Wages in Somalia: An Evaluation of Wage Differentials,” Journal of 
Economics and Sustainable Development 7, no. 16 (2016).
36.	
Although some activities on this front (funded by the AfDB, the EU, and the World Bank) are ongoing, creating effective 
institutions in this sector will require decades of sustained effort.
37.	
Consultations with government and private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, 2023.
38.	
It is possible that this figure underestimates the scale of mobile phone ownership in Somalia. An earlier 2017 World Bank 
household survey found that 92 percent of respondents ages 16 and older reported owning at least one mobile device.
39.	
Y. M. Mubarak, “Mobile Networks Evolution in East-Africa: Opportunities and Challenges in Mobile Networks in Kenya 
and Somalia” (master’s thesis, Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences, 2017), https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/
handle/10024/136924/Mobile%20Networks%20Evolution%20in%20East-Africa.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
40.	
International Finance Corporation (IFC), “Somalia—Market Assessment of Financial Services” (internal document, IFC, 
Washington, DC, 2022). 
41.	
This is suggested by existing estimates, but it must be highlighted that data on this front is highly unreliable because the 
national industry does not regularly collect statistics from operators.
42.	
 International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Measuring the Information Society Report 2018, Volume 2, 2018, 166.
43.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa”; and consultations with the Somalia IFC infrastructure investment team.
44.	
According to ITU, Measuring the Information Society Report 2018, the country is served by an Eastern Somalia Backbone 
Network, a Southern Somalia Backbone Network, and a Central Somalia Backbone Network.
45.	
World Bank, Missing Broadband Links in the Horn of Africa Region.
46.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa.” 
47.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa.” 
48.	
University of Pennsylvania, Mapping ICTs in Somalia: Policies, Players, and Practices (Center for Global Communication Studies at 
the Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania, June 2014); and consultations with some stakeholders 
of the Somali ICT industry, Nairobi, Kenya, January 2023.
49.	
A series of regulations are also in the process of being drafted. For instance, full implementation of the new regulatory 
frameworks on spectrum management and interconnection is still pending.
50.	
For example, the initial licensing fee is almost 19 times that of the equivalent license in Kenya for larger firms, and more than 
100 times that of the equivalent license in Kenya for smaller firms.
51.	
World Bank, “Broadband Missing Links and Regional Market Enabling Environment for the HoA Region—Somalia Feasibility 
Study, 2020. 
52.	
National Communications Authority, Market Assessment of the ICT Sector in Somalia, December 2022.
53.	
World Bank, “Somalia Digital Economy for Africa.”
54	
Despite the low prices of broadband services in Somalia, when considering these prices as a percentage of GDP per capita, it 
can be concluded that they are less affordable for the Somali population than for populations of regional peers.
55.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 
2023.
56.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS.”
57.	
World Bank, 2019 Somalia Enterprise Survey in Mogadishu and Bosaso, 2019. 
58.	
World Bank, “Water for Agropastoralist Livelihoods Pilot Project in Somaliland and Puntland—Endline Report,” August 2018.
=== PAGE 90 ===
|  68  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
59.	
For more information on this topic, see Food and Agriculture Organization, National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural 
Livelihoods—Somalia, 2021.
60.	
Albert Tuinhof et al., Economics of Water: Digging for Data—Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or Enabling Factor for 
Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
61.	
For instance, water tariffs in Mogadishu are around 10 times the world average.
62.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
63.	
M. Mekonnen, and A. Hoekstra, “Four Billion People Facing Severe Water Scarcity,”Science Advances 2, no. 2 (2016); and A. 
McNally et al, “Acute Water-Scarcity Monitoring for Africa,” Water 11, no. 1 (2019): 2968.
64.	
World Bank, “Somalia: Groundwater Assessment—Technical Report (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2021). 
65.	
Gianni Zanini et al., Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, volume 1: Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in 
Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank and FAO, 2018).
66.	
Federal Government of Somalia, National Development Plan 2017—2019 (Mogadishu, 2017); World Bank, Economics of Water: 
Digging for Data—Towards Understanding Water as a Limiting or Enabling Factor for Socioeconomic Growth in Somalia, 2021.
67.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data. 
68.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
69.	
World Bank, Barwaaqo—Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project, PAD, November 2022.
70.	
World Bank, Economics of Water: Groundwater Assessment—Technical Report, 2021. Unsurprisingly, a recent analysis of rural 
water projects in Somalia indicates that there are many opportunities to improve access to water through improvement of 
water infrastructure. For example, an investment of US$1 million in rural water infrastructure and livelihood development 
activities can generate an estimated discounted return of US$5.85 million under baseline assumptions. Investments in sand 
and underground dams, for instance, could go a long way toward improving water availability, with storage capacities that 
can reach up to 22,500 cubic meters, or approximately 8 times the average size of berkads and hafirs. Similarly, investing in 
500 manually drilled wells instead of boreholes could save US$2.8 million while retaining the same efficiency. 
71.	
Somalia’s provisional constitution (2012) has several articles related to water, and the 2011 National Water Act provided 
guidelines for the management of water resources and water distribution. The 2021 National Water Resource Development 
Strategy identifies opportunities to use access to water as a key steppingstone for socioeconomic development and aims to 
organize the country’s various acts and sector strategies related to water using increased data collection and analysis. There 
is also a nascent institutional framework for the management of water resources led by the Ministry of Energy and Water 
Resources (MoEWR) at the FGS and FMS level; the Ministries of Water Resources in Somaliland and Puntland have similar 
roles in those regions. Furthermore, the National Water Sector Coordination Facility, established by MoEWR, aims to provide 
overall leadership and strategic guidance on water sector development, promoting coordination between the different 
stakeholders in the sector.
72.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data. 
73.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
74.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
75.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
76.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
77.	
Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities.”
78.	
Tuinhof et al., Digging for Data.
79.	
Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities.”
80.	
Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities.”
81.	
According to a recent study by the Rift Valley Institute, the Hargeisa Water Agency is an exception.
82.	
Hagmann et al., “Commodified Cities.”
83.	
Consultations with stakeholders of the Somali private sector, Nairobi, January 2023.
84.	
A. Lindley, “Transnational Connections and Education in the Somali Context,” Journal of Eastern African Studies 2, no. 3 (2008): 
401–14.
85.	
J. Meester, A. Uzelac, and C. Elder, Transnational Capital in Somalia: Blue Desert Strategy (Den Haag, the Netherlands: 
Clingendael Institute, 2019).
86.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
87.	
World Bank, Bosaso and Mogadishu Enterprise Survey, 2019. 
88.	
World Bank, World Development Indicators Database.
89.	
World Bank, World Development Indicators Database.
=== PAGE 91 ===
|  69  |
	
CRITICAL ENABLING SECTOR BOTTLENECKS TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR
90.	
World Bank, Minding the Gap: The Equality Challenges of Higher Skills Development for Women and Girls in Horn of Africa, June 14, 
2023.
91.	
Federal Government of Somalia, Somalia Education Sector Analysis: Assessing Opportunities for Rebuilding the Country through 
Education (IIEP-UNESCO, Dakar, Senegal, 2022).
92.	
Charles Wafula and Godfrey Mulongo, “Are Children in South and Central Somalia Accessing Education, and Are They 
Learning? Baseline Information,” Social Society and Humanities Open 2, no. 1 (2020).
93.	
World Bank, Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project—Rajo Kaaba (Project Appraisal Document, PAD4863, 
June 2022).
94.	
World Bank, Building and Education System in Somalia (Concept note 180176, Washington, DC: World Bank, December 2022).
95.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 SIHBS.”
96.	
World Bank, Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (Project Appraisal Document, PAD4863, 2021).
97.	
Somalia’s publicly funded teachers represent only 14 percent of the total teaching force; see World Bank, Building and 
Education System in Somalia. 
98.	
Less than 10 percent of schools are public; see World Bank, Building and Education System in Somalia.
99.	
Over 65 percent of schools are owned by private individuals; see World Bank and Altai Consulting, Study on Understanding the 
Role of Non-State Education Providers in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018).
100.	 Umbrella associations are specific networks of nonstate schools in Somalia, largely founded by former teachers to associate 
schools in the absence of central authority in the 1990s; they have been mostly financed by diaspora members and 
international organizations.
101.	
UNICEF introduced integrated Koranic schools in 2006 that employ qualified teachers to instruct Somalis on both secular 
and religious curricula. 
102.	
World Bank and Altai Consulting, Study on Understanding the Role of Non-State Education Providers in Somalia.
103.	
World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government: Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow and Prosper 
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022).
104.	
World Bank, Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills.
105.	
Federal Government of Somalia, administrative data, Ministry of Education, Culture, and Higher Education.
106.	
World Bank, Building and Education System in Somalia.
107.	
World Bank, A Solid TVET System: The Key to Strengthening Somalia’s Employability, Productivity, and Economic Growth (draft 
document, World Bank, Washington, DC, July 2023).
108.	
Wendy Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs for the Poor and Vulnerable in Somalia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
109.	
Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs.
110.	
TDC, Final Evaluation of TVET and Higher Education for Boosting Road Infrastructure Development and Growth of Energy Services 
Project, 2020.
111.	
Federal Government of Somalia, Education Sector Analysis: Assessing Opportunities for Rebuilding the Country through Education 
(UNESCO Office for Africa, International Institute for Educational Planning, Dakar, Senegal, 2022).
112.	
World Bank, “Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project—‘Rajo Kaaba,’ Project” (Project Appraisal 
Document, PAD 4863, June 2022).
113.	
World Bank, Somalia Urbanization Review.
114.	
Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs.
115.	
Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs.
116.	
International Organization for Migration and Altai Consulting, Youth, Employment and Migration in Mogadishu, Kismayo and 
Baidoa, 2016.
117.	
It should be highlighted that labor market dynamics in Somalia could change with its upcoming accession to the African 
Economic Community, given the protocol relating to free movement of persons, which is poised to facilitate labor and skills 
mobility. 
118.	
Karamba, Improving Access to Jobs.
119	
Data collection on business development services demand for a World Bank project (that is, SCALED-UP).
120.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
121.	
Data collection by United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in 2022.
=== PAGE 92 ===
|  70  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
122.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
123.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
124.	
Data collection by UNIDO in 2022. 
125.	
Data collection by UNIDO in 2022. 
126.	
Data collection by UNIDO in 2022. 
127.	
Development Alternatives Incorporated (DAI), Somalia—EU Support to Policy Dialogue on Investment Climate, SME study, 
2021. 
128.	
DAI Sustainable Business Group, Summary Report: Somalia Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Building Landscape Analysis, May 2021.
129.	
Grant Thornton LLP, “Identifying the Demand for Business Development Services by MSMEs in Somalia” (advisory for 
Gargaara Company Limited, Grant Thornton, Chicago, IL, 2023).
130.	
Many donors and development institutions have established BDS programs, including the UNIDO EDU program, the 
Supporting Inclusive Growth in Somalia and PIMS (FCDO) programs, the Finance for Inclusive Growth in Somalia (EU) project, 
the SCALED-UP and SCORE (World Bank) projects, the EDC livelihood and GEEL (USAID) projects, and the Nordic Horn of 
Africa Opportunities Fund, among others. All have BDS components.
131.	
Joy Muballe and Felix Mwangi, KfW, Somalia Business Development, and Banking Advisory Services Market Study, December 2022.
=== PAGE 93 ===
|  71  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
	
ASSESSMENTS OF  
SECTORS WITH HIGH 
POTENTIAL TO  
ACCELERATE  
SOMALIA’S  
DEVELOPMENT
5.
One of the primary objectives of the CPSD is to provide sector-specific insights on 
economic sectors that provide the best near- to medium-term opportunities to accelerate 
private sector–led development in Somalia. To this end, the CPSD evaluated a list of 
10 high-potential sectors: electricity; the financial sector; digital infrastructure; health; 
education; water; agriculture, livestock, and fisheries; oil and gas; digital services; and 
affordable housing. The sectors were further short-listed on the basis of a filtering 
framework consisting of three categories of criteria: (a) desirability, (b) feasibility, and 
(c) value addition, which are delineated in the framework outlined in figure 5.1. Two 
sectors surfaced as high priorities for deep dives following this screening exercise: (a) 
electricity and (b) the financial sector. 
Source: 	 Original figure for this publication. 
FIGURE 5.1  ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK FOR SELECTION OF SECTORS WITH NEAR- TO MEDIUM- 
TERM OPPORTUNITIES
Economic Sector Selection Framework  
Desirability criteria
Value addition criteria
1.	 Job creation potential
2.	 Effect on economic 
diversification and 
resilience
3.	 Positive contributions 
to productivity of other 
economic sectors
4.	Other development 
impacts
1.	 Comprehensive analysis 
of the sector is needed
2. Value in synthesizing 
existing analysis
3. Value in highlighting  
the sector in the report
Feasibility criteria
1.	 Comparative advantage
2.	 Private sector engagement is 
possible in the near to medium term
3. “Political will” to develop sector is 
strong
4.	Deep-dive is possible within 
CPSD time frame given existing 
information and circumstances in 
Somalia
=== PAGE 94 ===
|  72  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
It is important to highlight that, while the agriculture, fisheries, and livestock sectors 
were not selected for reasons of feasibility and value addition, they are essential 
to Somalia’s economic development and food security. These sectors are central to 
enhancing the climate resilience of rural populations. They are also important for the 
reduction of poverty, forced displacement, and food insecurity of Somalis, and they are 
critical for the generation of employment and the development of the country’s export 
and productive sectors in the short, medium, and long term. This critical importance 
is not only because of the sectors’ prevalence within the Somali economy, but also 
because diversification toward higher-value-added activities in the medium to long 
term is possible in Somalia, especially in food sector value chains, which need robust 
agriculture, fisheries, and livestock sectors. It is thus a recommendation of this CPSD 
that ongoing analysis be leveraged and further analysis be done to close any remaining 
information gaps on these sectors,1 with a view to prioritizing their development in the 
short to medium term. 
5.1	 ELECTRICITY SECTOR
State of the Somali Electricity Sector
Despite significant progress discussed in the following paragraphs, access to reliable, 
predictable, safe, and affordable electricity remains limited and inequitable in Somalia. 
While a reliable baseline for electricity access in the country is still unavailable,2 diverse 
data sources consistently suggest that a large proportion of the Somali population lacks 
access to electricity. The 2023 “Tracking SDG 7” Energy Progress report estimates that 
only 49 percent of the Somali population has access to electricity at a national level.3 
Similarly, a recent household budget survey supported by the World Bank4 suggests 
that fewer than 62 percent of Somalis have access to electricity. Certain geographical 
regions and population groups are particularly disadvantaged, with the household 
budget survey showing that about 39.4 percent and 8.7 percent of rural and nomadic 
households, respectively, have access to electricity in comparison with 80.1 percent of 
urban households.5 When available, electricity in the country also tends to be unreliable, 
unpredictable, unsafe, and unaffordable. Delivery and servicing for large customer loads 
is largely unsuccessful owing to limits to the amount of electricity that can be delivered 
to consumers by each supplier.6 Furthermore, shortages are common7 and safety issues 
related to electricity infrastructure are frequent—with an estimated 60 percent of fires in 
the country caused by electrical wiring faults.8 In addition, the tariffs paid by Somalis for 
these electricity services are some of the highest in the world. While highly differentiated 
by region, rates paid by Somalis range between US$0.25 and US$1.30/kilowatt-hour 
(kWh),9 in comparison to average rates of US$0.09/kWh and US$0.144/kWh in Ethiopia 
and Kenya, respectively.10 As such, Somalia ranks in the upper 5 percent globally for 
power cost and in the upper 15 percent globally for power expenditure as a share of 
gross national income per household.11 
The underdeveloped state of both the on-grid and off-grid electricity sectors is a 
significant contributing factor to the limited availability of quality electricity services 
in Somalia. The Somali on-grid electricity sector consists of a fragmented patchwork 
of small, isolated diesel-based mini-grids, which are run by private sector operators 
almost solely in urban and peri-urban areas and are beset with intertwined challenges 
of ad hoc service provision. Meanwhile, although the off-grid electricity sector has 
developed substantially in recent years, it still comprises short supply chains with weak 
downstream markets and issues with quality. This section discusses the performance of 
each of these sectors in more detail.
=== PAGE 95 ===
|  73  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Performance of the On-Grid Electricity Sector
As is the case in many other countries emerging from conflict, Somalia lacks a 
centralized grid, with private sector energy service providers (ESPs) supplying most 
of the country’s electricity. The Ente Nazionale de Energia Elettrica (ENEE) was the 
single public utility operation in the country before the civil war,12 with an installed 
capacity of about 70 megawatts (MW), an annual energy production of 250 gigawatt-
hours (GWh), and an underdeveloped distribution network. As such, since before 
the civil war, a significant proportion of large enterprises, SMEs, and MSMEs had to 
generate their own electricity.13 During the civil war, this situation was aggravated 
even further, as most of the scarce infrastructure owned by ENEE was destroyed and 
looted. Accordingly, ENEE was barely generating any electricity when the Somali state 
collapsed in 1991, and after the civil war, private firms that had developed an anchor 
load (such as hotels and telecommunications suppliers) extended electricity connections 
to nearby households or businesses to sell their surplus power.14 Initially, these service 
providers supplied predetermined niches with the help of clan elders in a disjointed 
political terrain where elevated transaction costs15 undermined incentives for large-scale 
investments.16 However, many of the service providers have emerged or consolidated 
their operations mostly in urban centers, structured and organized in a vertically 
integrated basis and with independent electricity generation and distribution networks. 
The Somali on-grid electricity sector has thus grown to be essentially composed of 
an ensemble of isolated radial island distribution grids17 with embedded generators,18 
owned by at least 55 ESPs—which currently supply more than 90 percent of the on-grid 
electricity in Somalia.19
The installed capacity and distribution network of ESPs is insufficient and unevenly 
distributed. On-grid electricity demand peaked at about 400 MW in 202120 and is 
predicted to increase to between 1,000 MW and 4,600 MW by 2037.21 In this context, 
while reliable figures are unavailable, estimates on the current installed generation 
capacity in the country range from 138 MW22 to 344 MW.23 Its penetration to the 
country is also low and mostly inequitable.24 According to a 2018 World Bank 
assessment of the energy sector,25 penetration varies across regions, but especially 
between urban cities on the one hand and rural towns and IDP settlements on the 
other. In effect, because of the high capital costs and timing required to develop and 
extend an interconnected grid, and because of ESPs’ small size, ESPs typically do not 
reach the rural areas and IDP settlements.26 As such, according to estimates, while 
54 percent of urban households (HHs) are connected to a grid, only 16 percent of 
rural HHs and 19 percent of IDP HHs have a connection.27 In some regions this 
divergence is even more exacerbated, with approximately three-quarters of urban HHs 
in Somaliland having a connection and an estimated 2 percent of rural and IDP HHs 
in Hirshabelle having one.28 Additionally, there is a considerable divergence in the 
availability of on-grid energy even within urban centers. Most of Somalia’s installation 
capacity is concentrated in a few cities (for example, Mogadishu) supplied by two or 
more ESPs. Even some of the country’s larger cities (such as Burao, with a population 
of three-quarters of a million people) have power systems that are very small, with 
daytime loads in the order of 1 to 2 MW and a peak load of less than 4 MW.29 More 
critically, installed capacity in small towns is usually limited to unsynchronized captive 
electricity sources (such as small hybrid solar photovoltaics [PV] and battery systems 
with a backup high-speed diesel generator [HSDG]) with small stand-alone mini-grids 
or patchworks of independent power producers (for example, telecommunications firms 
that sell off their surplus energy).30
=== PAGE 96 ===
|  74  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Despite recent progress, the generation mix of ESPs and their lack of interconnection 
also result in an inefficient and expensive electricity supply.31 This is the case despite 
recent efforts by the Somali government to rehabilitate and optimize existing generation 
and distribution assets. Although renewable energy (that is, solar and wind) systems 
have been increasingly integrated into ESP grids since 2015, they remain below an 
estimated 12 percent of total electricity production in the country,32 with the generation 
infrastructure of most ESPs continuing to be primarily composed of multiple HSDGs 
located at each site with capacities that are as low as 500 kilo-volt-amperes (kVA) 
(although some reach up to 5000 kVA).33 This elevates electricity generation costs. As 
local sources of petroleum fuels have yet to be exploited in Somalia, the price of diesel 
is very high34—particularly in regions without a seaport, in which the need for road 
transportation drives up costs considerably.35 Inefficiencies on ESP grids aggravate this 
issue. Because most HSDGs have no automation and synchronization technology to 
improve dynamic reactivity to electricity load variations, “wet stacking”36 (that is, diesel 
fuel waste, increased pollution, performance degradation, and shorter HSDG lifespans) 
is widespread,37 and there are substantial constraints to the amount of electricity 
that ESPs can deliver to clients.38 Relatedly, issues with poorly maintained electricity 
distribution networks—which predominantly consist of overhead wiring—lead to 
electricity losses of up to 45 percent.39 These electricity losses partly comprise technical 
losses from aging low-voltage lines (that is, 415/240 V) extending over long distances, 
with leakage current and open circuit losses, bad workmanship (such as spaghetti 
wiring), and low load factors, among other issues (such as long distribution lines and 
imbalances between phases, the inadequate size of conductors, transformers distal from 
load centers, and the lack of protection from rain, wind, and humidity).40 Commercial 
losses related to the theft of electricity and low collection rates also occur as a result of 
deficient (or tampered) metering systems that constrain ESPs from collecting reliable 
electricity consumption data.41 Finally, ESP size limitation and the significant duplication 
of generation, distribution, technical, and maintenance infrastructure cause overhead 
power line and electric pole congestion and constrain ESPs from cost-effectively 
maintaining their infrastructure, making a large proportion of installed capacity 
inoperative or in poor condition42—especially as the prevalence of “wet stacking” 
increases unscheduled downtimes and labor costs necessary for maintenance.43
Performance of the Off-Grid Electricity Sector
While off-grid solar PV value chains have made noteworthy progress, they remain 
underdeveloped. The off-grid energy market has been developing in Somalia for a long 
time, given the scarce access of on-grid electricity in the country. Telecommunications 
companies and development organizations44 have used solar arrays since the 1980s, 
and commercial household PV product markets started to develop in the mid-1990s 
and have experienced an accelerated growth since 2010.45 Over-the-counter trading 
of small-scale PV products (such as solar lanterns and solar kits) has also expanded 
considerably in the past decade, and a Somali Green Energy Association (SOGEA) 
was established in 2021. Furthermore, in recent years, the government of Somalia—
supported by development institutions—has reduced market barriers and supported 
capacity building of solar integrators46 by providing business development services, 
results-based expansion grants, and seed grants. The performance of sponsored solar 
integrators has thus improved with increased inventories, revamped policies and 
procedures, and more innovative marketing and distribution strategies.47 Accordingly, 
some solar integrators48 have been able to become increasingly focused on representing 
solar PV product international brands49 and implementing off-grid projects of more than
=== PAGE 97 ===
|  75  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
1 kilowatt (kW) (such as solar home systems) for large clients—including commercial 
businesses, clinics, government institutions, and NGOs, among others.50 However, only a 
few solar integrators have been able to progress in this way. Many others continue to be 
small and opportunistic—with underdeveloped sales networks to aggregate volume and 
achieve economies of scale, as well as scarce specialized knowledge.51 A proportion of 
solar integrators in Somalia thus remains involved in selling the stocks of equipment they 
carry (such as batteries, inverters, and lanterns) at a retail level,52 keeping supply chains of 
solar off-grid PV products short and downstream markets weak in spite of recent progress. 
Relatedly, many generalist retailers that focus on selling small-scale solar PV products 
(such as battery- and solar-powered torches and rechargeable lanterns) to households, 
SMEs, and other over-the-counter clients as part of a wider merchandise range (such as 
consumer electronics and household appliances)53 continue to source them directly from 
manufacturers or international distributors instead of buying from local integrators, 
keeping their transaction costs high.54
Demand for solar off-grid products is thus still unmet, although the supply of these 
products has improved considerably in recent years. The solar PV sector continues 
to evolve quickly. Business models are changing in the sector, with great strides being 
made to improve off-grid solar PV product supply. For instance, there has been a 
considerable increase in the installation of quality-verified solar home systems (SHS),55 
which has allowed household electrification to increase over the circumstances in 2017, 
when three-quarters of the solar PV market was concentrated in large commercial or 
institutional systems.56 The supply of small-scale solar PV has significantly expanded, 
with some reports indicating that the number of units sold every six months now equals 
the total market size for these products in 2017. However, market spoilage with poor-
quality products continues to pose a daunting challenge to the development of Somalia’s 
well-supplied solar market. Off-grid PV product value chains are still unable to meet 
the demand for these products57—which in 2017 was woefully undersupplied, with the 
entirety of the market being equivalent to only 3.8 MW per year despite a demand that 
was approximately five times greater.58 Furthermore, demand for these products continues 
to increase in Somalia, with consumer awareness and acceptance of solar off-grid PV 
products increasing substantially in recent years,59 a high willingness by varied population 
groups to pay for off-grid power,60 and off-grid solar PV options usually providing 
electricity at a lower cost than current alternatives.61 This demand comes partially from 
urban households and MSMEs that continue to be dissatisfied with the costly and 
unreliable supply of electricity from mini-grids,62 as well as from rural and peri-urban 
communities that need dispersed small- or large-scale captive generation (such as solar 
home systems), given a continued scarcity or nonexistence of on-grid electricity. However, 
the demand also originates from population groups that require different technology 
approaches to electrification,63 like IDP and nomadic communities (for example, mobile 
pastoralists), for whom portable electricity delivery systems (such as pico solar devices) are 
the primary solution to increasing electrification needs driven by the growing significance 
of electronic devices (such as mobile phones) in everyday lives. 
Despite recent developments, the quality of commercial solar PV products requires 
further improvements in Somalia. A wide range of steps have been taken in recent years 
to improve the quality of off-grid solar PV products in Somalia. Technical assistance has 
been provided to prepare the Somali government for an eventual adoption of Lighting 
Global and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) quality standards, and 
trainings have been imparted to staff members from Somalia’s Ministry of Energy and 
Water, the Somali Bureau of Standards (SBS), and Somaliland’s Ministry of Energy and 
Minerals on processes of standards adaptation implementation and how to control 
counterfeit solar products in the off-grid solar market. A consumer awareness and 
communications strategy to increase use of quality solar off-grid energy solutions has
=== PAGE 98 ===
|  76  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
also been developed,64 with receptiveness to higher-priced quality products increasing 
in some markets.65 However, the quality of solar PV products continues to vary greatly 
throughout the country. At present, only a portion of solar PV products has gone 
through a quality verification process, and very few supply-side stakeholders provide 
after-service support for their products.66 Awareness of the importance of purchasing 
quality products and of how to identify counterfeits, while growing, also continues 
to lag consumers’ more general awareness about off-grid PV solar products.67 In this 
context, anecdotal evidence points to solar PV products still being a commodity in 
Somalia, with pricing continuing to be the primary driving force of supply and demand 
decisions, a large proportion of consumers continuing to have low expectations from 
these products, and branding being uncommon.68 Most of the currently available 
solar PV products continue to be of poor quality, with some failing after only a few 
months and with some suppliers continuing to choose to stock such products with the 
expectation that their merchandise rotation will increase.69 The commercial supply 
of quality solar PV off-grid solutions also continues to be hindered by the subsidized 
distribution of poor-quality products by NGOs70 and the fact that—in a context in 
which the financed PayGo supply of pico and solar home systems71 remains scarce—
most retailers require up-front payment for these products with cash, which is beyond 
the reach of many customers.72
Opportunities for Private Sector Investment in the Electricity Sector
Given the growing demand for affordable electricity in Somalia and the subpar 
performance of both the on-grid and the off-grid electricity sectors, there are 
numerous untapped opportunities in these markets. As identified by a recent 
geospatial analysis for least-cost electrification in Somalia,73 in the short to medium 
term, these opportunities lay primarily with mini-grid and stand-alone solutions.74 
More specifically, these opportunities for private sector investment include (a) the 
improvement of the operational efficiency of existing mini-grids and distribution 
network infrastructures and (b) the greater use of renewable technologies for electricity 
generation. These opportunities are discussed in more detail throughout this section.
Upgrading ESP On-Grid Infrastructure
The interconnection of current ESP distribution networks and generation infrastructure 
has the potential to accomplish considerable improvements in network reliability and 
operational efficiency, improving both top-line and bottom-line financial performance. 
Investments in synchronization and automation that enable the use of parallel generation 
for better generator performance and improved dynamic reactivity to electricity load 
variations can reduce the significant amounts of “wet stacking” that characterize Somali 
electricity ESPs at present. Accordingly, such investments could allow ESPs to achieve 
significant revenue growth and margin improvements due to escalations in maximum 
generation power output, an increase in the lifespan of generator engines, and a reduction 
of maintenance costs and unscheduled generation downtimes. Similarly, investments 
in MV distribution network reinforcement infrastructure (such as poles, conductors, 
line accessories, distribution transformers, and metering equipment) could allow ESPs 
to optimize their overall distribution network operations integration and generation 
synchronization. This would enable firms to improve their top-line and bottom-line 
financial performance by helping them reduce distribution network duplications, increase 
network capacity, and reduce network losses, as well as invest in larger generating units 
that allow for economies of scale.
=== PAGE 99 ===
|  77  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
4.6
Source: 	 World Bank, Global Solar Atlas 2.0, Solar resource 
data: Solargis, 2020, https://solargis.com/maps-and-
gis-data/download/somalia.
Note: 	
kWh = kilowatt-hour; kWp = kilowatt peak.
Source: 	 World Bank, Global Solar Atlas 2.0, Solar resource 
data: Solargis, 2020, https://globalwindatlas.info/en/
area/Somalia.
Note: 	
m = meter; W = watt. 
FIGURE 5.2 PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER POTENTIAL, 
2020
FIGURE 5.3 MEAN POWER DENSITY AT 100M, 
2020
kWh/kWp per day and year
W/m2
Greater Use of Renewable Technologies
Given the small portion of total installed generation capacity that comes from 
renewable sources75 and the exceptional renewable energy potential in Somalia, the 
untapped market for renewable solutions is considerable. The country’s level of solar 
global horizontal irradiation is one of the highest in the Horn of Africa at 5.38 to 6.74 
kWh/square meter (m2),76 with the north of Somalia having solar irradiation rates and 
a PV power potential that are even more elevated (figure 5.2). Accordingly, recent 
estimates indicate that solar power alone could potentially generate an excess of 2,000 
kWh/m2 in the country.77 Likewise, having the largest coastline in Africa, Somalia 
experiences an average wind speed of 9.01 m/s and a mean power density of 784 W/m2 
in the windiest 10 percent of its territory (figure 5.3). Somalia has the highest potential 
for onshore wind power on the African continent, and it has an estimated offshore wind 
electricity generation of up to 283 GW.78 There are also other renewable energy sources 
that could be pursued in Somalia, such as hydroelectric, wave, tidal, ocean current, and 
geothermal energy, although its plentiful sun and wind resources are the most promising 
pursuits.79 However, in-depth evaluation of renewable resources has to be conducted 
before large-scale projects can be initiated to harness them for power generation.
Long term average of daily/yearly sum, period 1994-2018
kWh/kWp
Daily sum:	
<  4.0         4.4        4.8        5.2       5.6
Yearly sum:	
<  1461       1607      1753      1899     2045
W/m2
1000+
0
=== PAGE 100 ===
|  78  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
In this context, investments in the hybridization of generation networks with batteries 
constitute an attractive opportunity. The complementarity between energy sources in 
hybrid generation networks for both mini-grids and standalone captive solutions can 
result in substantial improvements in fuel consumption and efficiency, the extension 
of HSDG lifespans, and decreased reliance on diesel imports. These improvements 
are especially substantial when such systems use battery energy storage systems to 
provide a more effective variable dispatchable source of electricity for load demands 
and thus allow for rapid-response peak-load generation capacity. Furthermore, in 
recent years, greater prospects for hybridized generation have emerged following 
significant decreases in technology costs. Automation, smart network management, 
and lower storage expenses, among other technological advances, have diminished 
the costs of electricity generation with renewable energy solutions. The levelized cost 
of electricity for autonomous mini-grids using only renewable energy sources, for 
instance, fell to between US$0.39 per kWh and US$0.75 per kWh by 2020 and has 
continued to decrease since then, with prospects of reaching US$0.20 per kWh in 
2035.80 Given the high costs of generation in Somalia, it is estimated that, together 
with the synchronization of generation units, hybridization could contribute to an 
average reduction to generation costs of about 25 percent in Somalia.81 In effect, some 
of the higher cost ESPs that have hybridized their generation systems in Somalia82 
have been able to reduce generation costs by up to 40 percent.83 In addition, capital 
costs for renewable generation are also projected to continue dropping in the next few 
years,84 making hybridization of mini-grid systems in Somalia an even more attractive 
investment opportunity and mitigating what has been one of the primary constraints to 
increased hybridization investments in the country.85
The scaling of PayGo schemes86 could fulfil suppressed private sector demand for 
off-grid standalone solutions. Demand for these products in the country is suppressed 
because they are beyond the reach of many consumers, in a context where little credit 
is offered. However, willingness to purchase off-grid electricity is high when financing 
options are provided.87 Given that 97 percent of Somalis have access to mobile money 
accounts in the country,88 there is a fertile ground for PayGo systems. In effect, private-
led pilot projects of two types of PayGo models have already been deployed in the 
country at various stages of the value chain. That is, PayGo systems have already been 
implemented for both local solar enterprises89 and final consumers.90 While these pilots 
have had mixed results, most of the pilots have failed because of the plug-and-play 
mentality of the implementing enterprises, which have not tested different business and 
marketing models to find the best one for the Somali market. Furthermore, some of the 
challenges that constrained the pilots’ development are poised to be resolved in the short 
term. For instance, the appetite for off-grid standalone products has increased in recent 
years. Similarly, the noninteroperability of mobile money platforms that disincentivized 
electricity service providers from adopting PayGo systems91 should be resolved now that 
mobile network operators (namely, Homuud, Telecoms, Golis, Sometel, Amtel, and 
Somlink) are required to interconnect.92
=== PAGE 101 ===
|  79  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Sector-Specific Constraints to Private Sector Development in the  
Electricity Sector
The potential of the electricity sector in Somalia is challenged by a number of 
bottlenecks that introduce uncertainty and inhibit investment, hindering the sector’s 
development and constraining improvements in its performance. Issues with the sector’s 
enabling environment persist despite recent progress. Given a still unresolved regulatory 
vacuum and an unfavorable political economy, the scarcity of sector-specific technical 
skills and the inconsistency and scarcity of information on energy use across various 
population centers constrain further development of energy firms and limit investments 
in the Somali energy sector. 
A Number of Gaps Remain to Be Addressed to Create Adequate Enabling Environment  
for Electricity Sector Firms
While Somalia has made enormous strides in recent years toward improving the 
enabling environment for the electricity sector, the sector continues to be characterized 
by a de facto institutional and regulatory vacuum. A new Electricity Act was enacted 
in March 2023, which better defines institutional roles and mandates and develops 
the critical building blocks for the operation of electricity services under license. 
With the new act, the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoEWR) is assigned 
the responsibility of setting sectoral policies and undertaking least-cost planning 
development, implementation, and monitoring for generation, transmission, on 
grid-expansion, as well as the oversight and control of rural electrification planning 
and coordination. Conversely, the National Electricity Authority—established by the 
Electricity Act as an independent entity93—is tasked with implementation, enforcement, 
and monitoring of the law, including the regulation of tariffs and technical standards, 
the handling of licenses, and the imposition of penalties and damages arising from the 
violation of the law. The manner in which a public power transmission system will 
be administered in the country and the general framework that electricity generation 
and distribution firms (which are ultimately tasked with delivery of electricity) need 
to abide by, are also defined by the Act. It additionally sets out high level conditions 
for investments in the electricity sector, describes the rights of electricity companies 
and consumers, and underlines the proscription of market power abuse in the sector. 
With this framework, Somalia could potentially increase the number of players in 
the electricity sector, incentivizing private competition, encouraging energy access 
and affordability, and fostering the deployment of renewable energy. Two secondary 
regulations (that is, the tariff and licensing regulations) were also drafted and enacted 
in the first quarter of 2023.94 However, a de facto institutional and regulatory vacuum 
continues to characterize the electricity sector at present.95 Some secondary legislation 
(such as regulation of zoning and renewable energy), codes, and standards necessary to 
operationalize the Electricity Act have yet to be enacted, while the operationalization 
of those already enacted (such as the tariff and licensing regulations) is underway and 
calls for greater support. Furthermore, despite recent capacity-building efforts,96 existing 
government institutions (such as MoEWR) continue to suffer from chronic understaffing 
and underfunding and the lack of technical capacity to operationalize the Electricity Act 
and more generally manage the power sector.97 Policies for least-cost electrification and 
electricity access are also lacking. Furthermore, while the National Electricity Authority 
has recently been put in place, most regional institutions are not fully functional—and 
those that are functional lack any sort of harmonization with federal institutions.98 
Accordingly, the on-grid electricity sector continues to be essentially unregulated by the 
government, operating on an ad hoc basis at both federal and regional levels.
=== PAGE 102 ===
|  80  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Market distortions in both the on-grid and the off-grid electricity sectors remain 
widespread, in a context characterized by de facto regional monopolies and a lack of 
market structure. While some ESPs operate in several regions,99 urban centers are largely 
dominated by specific ESPs. In effect, according to World Bank estimates, in 2021 the 
private ESP BECO owned about 85 percent of the total installed capacity in Mogadishu, 
SomPower owned approximately 95 percent of the on-grid network in Hargeisa, BEC 
operated the entirety of the on-grid network in Berbera, NESCOM controlled most 
of the electricity generation and distribution in Garowe, and ENEE owned 85 percent 
of total capacity in Bosaso.100 Similarly, on-grid electricity supply in Merca, Balad, 
and most smaller urban centers is controlled by a sole ESP.101 This dominance of local 
on-grid electricity markets has likely become more deep-rooted in recent years due to a 
significant interest among ESPs to undergo mergers and acquisitions.102 These mergers and 
acquisitions have increased technical and staffing efficiencies (such as rationalization of 
distribution networks) and economies of scale,103 but they have also led to anticompetitive 
behaviors including a lack of competitive pressure on tariffs and the barring of other 
operators from accessing the energy distribution infrastructure dominated by specific 
ESPs.104 In this context, ESPs benefit from cartelistic behaviors and freely increase 
electricity tariffs on the basis of the best commercial case for each firm.105 Meanwhile, 
solar PV value chains continue to operate in a market with no quality standards or control 
of counterfeit products. They are also constrained by an inability to supply larger solar 
PV products to firms that are not ESPs, given an inexistent transmission network and 
restricted access to distribution grids.106 Additionally, as foreign investors are obligated 
to structure any potential on-grid energy projects as joint ventures with existing ESPs, 
the investors have been unable to de-risk prospective investments because of potential 
problems enforcing contracts with ESPs and an inability to get political risk and breach of 
contract insurance in such circumstances.107
Gaps in Sector-Specific Technical Skills Constrain Private Sector Development and 
Investment in the Somali Energy Sector
There is a substantial gap in the supply of skilled labor for the electricity sector. Both 
the on-grid and the off-grid energy sectors exhibit significant shortages of skilled 
labor in essential areas such as planning, financial and economic analysis, policy, 
procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and resource assessment, among 
others. According to a recent survey by SOMINVEST on the energy and ICT sectors,108 
80 percent, 74 percent, and 70 percent of firms answered that issues with planning and 
design, operations and maintenance, and installation of their equipment, respectively, 
led to financial losses. The same survey finds that 80 percent and 74 percent of on-grid 
energy firms feel they have skill gaps related to grid systems and systems operation 
software, respectively, and that a large majority of firms in off-grid system value 
chains have issues finding technical expertise in areas including the identification of 
defective equipment. Relatedly, a 2016 workforce survey by Shuraako points to a 
lack of sufficiently skilled employees as the major constraint to further development 
of private firms in the renewable energy sector (figure 5.4). About 86 percent of the 
renewable energy firms that were surveyed emphasized their difficulties with recruitment 
in Somalia, especially for infrastructure design (such as technical plans, blueprints, 
and drawings), construction, installation and maintenance skills, general engineering 
abilities, and technical expertise in specific renewable energy technologies.109
=== PAGE 103 ===
|  81  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Capacity building, tertiary education, and TVET training in Somalia have not been 
able to address these skills gaps yet, constraining investments in the sector. Energy firms 
recently consulted by the World Bank110 ascertained that the skillsets of employees 
hired directly from universities and technical education training programs are weak and 
barely sufficient to tackle technical roles. Universities providing education in science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields also experience high rates 
of student attrition, especially of women.111 Most of the programs implemented in 
recent years to improve this situation (by strengthening TVET and higher education 
institutions)112 have had mixed results at best113 because of a range of reasons, including 
the overall these institutions are ill-equipped and the programs lack alignment with the 
needs of private sector firms. In this context, firms in the energy sector are obligated 
to hire foreign nationals (figure 5.5), who are considerably more expensive than local 
talent, for jobs requiring technical expertise114—when such talent is willing to relocate 
to Somalia and firms have the resources to do so. As this is, seldom possible, most firms 
in the energy sector are not investment ready and believe they will not be ready unless 
external technical support is provided for a range of technical issues (such as network 
and equipment standardization and loss reduction).115  In effect, according to recent 
assessments of the Somali electricity sector, one of the primary reasons the country has 
not been able to fully benefit from its renewable resources for electricity generation is 
the continued lack of technical skills.116 
Lack of Reliable Data Hampers Monitoring and Planning Activities in the Somali Energy 
Sector
Demand forecasting and least-cost planning are problematic for the public and private 
sectors because of data gaps. Electricity sector stakeholders are unable to adequately 
monitor and plan generation capacity and associated transmission and distribution 
grids because of the scarcity of data on the Somali electricity sector.117 This is largely 
because ESPs currently do not provide data or information to support planning exercises 
(or even coordinate among themselves for this purpose), and because the sampling 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Source: 	 Shuraako, Somali Renewable Energy Skilled  
Workforce Survey Report, Somali Renewable Energy 
Forum 2016.
Source: 	 Shuraako, Somali Renewable Energy Skilled  
Workforce Survey Report, Somali Renewable Energy 
Forum 2016.
FIGURE 5.4  BIGGEST CHALLENGES TO IMPLEMENT 
RENEWABLE ENERGY SERVICES AND PRODUCTS, 
2016 
FIGURE 5.5  REASONS THAT SURVEYED FIRMS 
HAVE HIRED A FOREIGN NATIONAL, 2016
Ranked in order of importance in %
Percent of surveyed firms, selection of all reasons that apply
57
57
43
14
 They have more 
relevant work 
experience
Not enough 
workers with  
relevant skills 
and knowledge
Not enough 
workers with  
prior  
experience
Not enough 
programs  
to train  
workers
Not enough 
financing
No access to 
additional 
financing
Government 
regulations
Lack of  
market  
demand
 They have 
more skills and 
knowledge
 They have more 
formal technical 
training
 They have a 
higher level of 
formal training
Most important          Somewhat important         Least important
=== PAGE 104 ===
|  82  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
of energy use across various population centers is insufficient. Accordingly, adequate 
forecasting of load demands and generation requirements is challenging, which increases 
uncertainty about private investments in the on-grid sector and prevents proper 
administration and low-cost planning of electricity sector infrastructure by public 
sector stakeholders—thus limiting electrification outside of the higher-density urban 
areas. This difficulty with adequate forecasting also constrains strategic and business-
planning processes of off-grid solar integrators and retailers, affecting the accuracy of 
procurement, marketing, and distribution strategies.118 
5.2.	 FINANCIAL SECTOR
Access to Finance Remains a Key Challenge Limiting Private Sector De-
velopment in Somalia
Access to a broad range of financial services is still limited for a significant proportion 
of the population in Somalia despite a very high uptake of mobile money across the 
country. Regarding access to financial accounts, financial inclusion in Somalia does not 
fare badly in comparison to countries in its region owing to a considerable proliferation 
of mobile money accounts in recent years. Mobile money has become the dominant 
retail payment instrument in the country, with an estimated 73 percent of the adult 
Somali population using mobile money services. This is in line with the mobile money 
uptake in Kenya, a much more advanced neighbor that has been a pioneer in mobile 
money payments.119 However, the overall penetration rate of banking services is 
reported to be between 10 and 15 percent of the adult population, with active accounts 
being much less and most customers being in urban centers and richer socioeconomic 
sectors. Therefore, a large portion of the population outside Mogadishu does not use 
banks, and the poor population has no access to financial services—except for the 
reception of remittances and mobile money payments or e-wallets.120 As the financial 
system is highly dollarized, there is also a significant portion of the population that 
operates solely in the Somali shilling (SOS) economy,121 which is excluded from the 
formal financial system because financial institutions (FIs) do not accept nor offer 
financial services in SOS. 
Unsurprisingly, access to finance for MSMEs and productive sectors remains a key 
challenge, limiting private sector development. The 2019 Enterprise Survey for 
Mogadishu and Bosaso found access to finance to be a key obstacle for business 
development (figure 5.6). The survey also notes that Somali businesses rely on internal 
sources of funding for 92 percent of their working capital needs (compared to the 
average of 78 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa), and only 2 percent of needs are met by 
banks (compared to the average of 8 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa). While 94 percent 
of the firms in Somalia have a bank account, only 4 percent have a bank loan or a line 
of credit. Furthermore, the modest financial intermediation that does exist is largely 
concentrated on short-term trade finance and relatively large loans, whose weight in the 
total portfolio of FIs increased in 2020 compared to 2019.122 With an increase of default 
risk perceptions with COVID-19, by early 2021 about 63 percent of formal firms found 
access to credit difficult, with a much larger proportion of informal firms having no 
access to credit.123 This situation leaves a large unmet market demand for financing in 
the real economy.124 The Islamic banking principles followed by all FIs in Somalia also 
affect the availability of new products and services tailored to meet private sector needs.
=== PAGE 105 ===
|  83  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Lack of Access to Finance Is Linked to the Underdevelopment of the Somali Financial 
Sector in Spite of Its Recent Growth
The Somali financial sector has come a long way in recent years. The estimated size 
of the Somali financial sector assets quadrupled between 2018 and 2023,125 increasing 
from US$512 million to US$2,101 million.126 Total assets and customer deposits at 
commercial banks more than quadrupled from US$415 million to US$1,795 million 
and from US$332 million to US$1,431 million, respectively (figure 5.7).128 In addition, 
credit to the private sector more than doubled from US$161 million to US$404 million 
(figure 5.8). Private transfers, including remittances, increased by 36 percent from 
US$1,578 million to US$2,142 million between 2019 and 2022.129 Finally, mobile 
money use has been growing steadily (according to the Central Bank of Somalia [CBS], 
approximately 650 million transactions worth US$8 billion were recorded in 2022), 
with a recent survey by Somalia’s National Bureau of Statistics reporting that 97 percent 
of the surveyed households have access to mobile money or wallets.130 The number of 
financial service providers has also steadily increased. With the first commercial bank 
established in 2009, the Somali financial sector now comprises at least 13 domestic 
commercial banks131 licensed by CBS,132 20 money transfer businesses (MTBs),133 seven 
mobile money operators (MMOs),134 11 microfinance institutions (MFIs),135 seven 
insurance companies,136 and multiple MSME financing facilities (table 5.1). The state 
development bank and a stock exchange, while in existence, remain largely inactive. In 
addition, the CBS recently granted licenses to two foreign banks, one of which became 
operational in late 2023, marking a significant milestone for the Somali financial 
sector’s development.
0	
10	
20	
30	
40	
50	
60	
70	
80
Large
Medium
Small
Micro
Sources: 	World Bank, 2019 Somalia Enterprise Survey in Mogadishu and Bosaso; World Bank, 
Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda  
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021).
FIGURE 5.6 ACCESS TO FINANCE IS ONE OF THE KEY CONSTRAINTS FOR 
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT IN SOMALIA, 2019 
Top three obstacles faced by firms (percentage of firms in each size category)
Access to finance
Access to land
Licenses and permits
Access to land
Tax rates
Corruption
Access to land
Access to finance
Corruption
Corruption
Access to finance
Transport cost
=== PAGE 106 ===
|  84  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2018	
  2019	
    2020	
      2021	
         2022	
            2023
Total assets              Customer deposits
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on Central Bank of Somalia data. 
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product.
FIGURE 5.7  COMMERCIAL BANKS ASSETS AND CUSTOMER DEPOSITS 
GROWTH, 2018–23
% of GDP
5
5
7
4
6
9
12
10
14
11
16
12
2018	
                         2019	                                             2020	                                            2021                                            2022
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Source: 	 Central Bank of Somalia; World Bank – World Development Indicators
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product.
FIGURE 5.8  DOMESTIC CREDIT TO THE PRIVATE SECTOR BY BANKS,  
SOMALIA AND COMPARATORS, 2018–22 
% of GDP
Kenya
Sub-Saharan Africa 
(excluding high income)
Djibouti
Rwanda
Uganda
Sudan
Somalia
South Sudan
=== PAGE 107 ===
|  85  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
TABLE 5.1  KEY FINANCIAL SECTOR INSTITUTIONS IN SOMALIA, 2023
Source: 	 World Bank staff calculations based on Central Bank of Somalia data. 
Note: 	
GDP = gross domestic product; – = not available. 
a.	
The number of financial sector actors is not exhaustive given limited centralized data. It also includes financial institutions that 
do not have licenses to operate with Somali regulatory authorities.
b.	 The figures are based on data obtained from the Central Bank of Somalia and calculations from World Bank staff based on fig-
ures in other analytical reports. They do not represent the assets of all the financial sector actors, given limited data availability.
c.	
It should be noted that two foreign banks were licensed by the Central Bank of Somalia recently. One of these became opera-
tional in 2023 and the other is licensed but not yet operational.
d.	 The reported figure excludes loans from Gargaara to commercial banks. The Central Bank of Somalia reported US$1,795 million 
in total assets (including foreign banks) at the end of December 2023.
e.	
According to a United Nations Industrial Development Organization report on the financial sector, asset sizes of microfinance 
institution (MFI) players ranged from US$0.3 million and US$3 million in 2020. The average asset size is therefore  
US$1.65 million multiplied by the number of MFIs in 2020 (US$18.15 million). Assuming a 5 percent growth every year until 2023 
results in US$21.01 million, which rounded, gives US$21 million in assets on average.
f.	
According to an EY report on the financial sector, the market size was estimated at US$58 million in 2017. Assuming market size 
is understood in assets and a 5 percent growth every year, insurance market size could be equivalent to US$78 million in 2023.
g. 	 This figure represents assets held by the Somali Development Bank before the collapse of the government in 1991.
h.	 This figure represents the value of Gargaara active loans. The figure does not represent their market value.
i.	
Market capitalization based on data published on the Somali Stock Exchange website as of December 2023.
Numbera
Financial Sector Assets  
(US$, millions)b
% of Financial Sector 
Assets
% of GDP
Domestic Commercial Banksc
13
1757d
83.63%
15.26%
Foreign Commercial Banks
1
28
1.33%
0.24%
Money Transfer Businesses
20
-
-
-
Mobile Money Operators
7
-
-
-
Microfinance Institutions
11
21e
1.00%
0.18%
Insurance Companies
7
78f
3.71%
0.68%
Somali Developmenant and 
Reconstruction Bank
1
20g
0.95%
0.17%
Gargaara (government wholesale 
finance institution)
1
10h
0.48%
0.09%
Somali Stock Exchange
1
187i
8.90%
1.62%
=== PAGE 108 ===
|  86  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
However, the financial sector remains in its early stages of development, with low 
financial depth, scarce market-based financial intermediation, and unknown levels of 
financial soundness. Somalia’s domestic credit to GDP ratio is one of the lowest in the 
region at below 5 percent, while the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (excluding high-
income economies) is above 25 percent. This reflects the context in which market-based 
financial intermediation continues to be a challenge, given the early-stage development 
of core financial infrastructure and institutions and the widespread informality that 
persists in the private sector. For example, the lack of a credit bureau and risk-sharing 
or de-risking instruments makes financial institutions risk averse, leading to a lack of 
risk appetite to venture into less known sectors, work with new borrowers, or innovate 
in products and services. Banks thus prefer holding cash over providing credit. At the 
end of December 2023, cash on hand was at US$616 million, while credit to the private 
sector was only at US$404 million, accounting for 43 percent and 28 percent of total 
deposits of the system, respectively.137 Furthermore, lenders impose heavy collateral 
and guarantor requirements, which many of the MSMEs are unable to meet. As a 
result, a large number of businesses seem to rely on informal financing channels. Not 
only is extending credit a challenge for banks, but also their loans are concentrated in 
a few sectors and around urban areas. At the end of 2023, trade finance, construction 
or real estate, and personal or household loans accounted for 72 percent of the total 
loan portfolio.138 Financial institutions also primarily transact in US dollars, including 
for mobile money transactions, as the country’s economy is highly dollarized with 
limited SOS in circulation (which are mostly counterfeit). In this context, while financial 
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
FIGURE 5.9 CONSOLIDATED COMMERCIAL BANK LIABILITIES
Source: 	 Central Bank of Somalia, “Policy Brief 002/2023: Somalia’s Financial Sector”  
(Mogadishu, Somalia: Central Bank of Somalia, May 2023) and Central Bank of Somalia, Commercial Bank data (2022–23).
297
299
322
361
371
387
406
459
456
463 503
712
707
767
841
1,017 1,060
1,114
1,271
1,247 1,268 1,219
1,400
1,506
2018
2019
2021
2020
2022
2023
US$, millions
Total liabilities       Other liabilities      Customer deposits       
Shareholder’s equity      Microfinance loans
March
June
September
December
March
June
September
December
March
June
September
December
March
June
September
December
March
June
September
December
March
June
September
December
=== PAGE 109 ===
|  87  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
soundness of the financial sector appears to be adequate, there is a lot of uncertainty 
surrounding this issue due to limited data. For instance, while the core capital of 
banking institutions is reported to range between 12 percent and 15 percent of total net 
assets in the banking system, the lack of capital risk-weighting regulation does not allow 
for a good assessment of the solvency of the banking system.139 
The concentration of the Somali financial sector continues to constrain its development. 
Despite a recent proliferation of financial institutions in the country, only a few banks 
continue to concentrate most of the financial intermediation in Somalia. Five banks 
account for nearly 90 percent of the banking industry’s assets, deposits, and loans, and 
the two largest banks account for over half of the system, in a context in which the 
banking sector continues to remain the primary form of financing. Although there is 
a stock market, it has not had much activity. Nonbank financial institutions, though 
growing in number, also continue to have a minor effect on financial intermediation. 
While MTBs—14 of which are licensed—continue to play an important role as the 
preferred service providers for money transfers from Somali diaspora and payments 
for international purchases,140 they do not offer other financial services. Microfinance 
institutions—10 of which are licensed as per mid-2023 World Bank discussions with 
CBS—are slowly getting organized but have limited access to funds (with a total size 
just over US$5 million, based on CBS data) and operate in limited areas. Insurance 
companies, though present for a few years, are yet to gain significant business (they were 
reported to have total assets of US$70 million in 2022), given limited product offerings 
and a missing legal and regulatory framework. Meanwhile, although four mobile 
money operators have been licensed since 2021, one telecommunications conglomerate 
continues to hold a monopoly in this market.141 Known benefits of competition in the 
financial sector (such as greater efficiency in the production of financial services, higher-
quality financial products, and more innovation) are thus lacking. 
Furthermore, Somalia’s banking industry remains isolated from the global financial 
system. Banks have few functional correspondent banking relationships (CBRs), and 
only a fraction of international payments are channeled through the banking sector. 
In contrast, most flows are channeled through the MTB industry, whose arrangements 
are increasingly becoming regulated. However, the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated 
the vulnerability of these channels. The lack of functional CBRs constrains global 
connectivity and thus poses risks to remittances, ODA, and investment flows. Efforts 
are underway to facilitate the development of CBRs. Such efforts include working 
closely with the Somali Bankers Association and its members, with the strong support 
of CBS, the World Bank, and development partners, in particular through the Financial 
Systems Initiative (box 5.1). However, the strong perception of anti-money-laundering/
countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) risks due to weak legal, institutional, 
and regulatory frameworks and their enforcement prompt foreign financial institutions 
to adopt de-risking strategies that hinder the creation of those relationships.
=== PAGE 110 ===
|  88  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
BOX 5.1 SOMALIA FINANCIAL SYSTEM INITIATIVE (FSI)
With the support of development partners from 
the UK, US, and EU, the World Bank launched the 
FSI (2021–2025) to help Somalia and its financial 
Phase 1: Convene key stakeholders to build consensus 
on Somalia’s barriers to integration into the global 
financial system. Raise awareness relating to key 
barriers and gaps (at institutional and national levels), 
relevant international standards (especially relating to 
anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of 
terrorism [AML/CFT] compliance needs), and the tools 
available.
Phase 2: Use tools to enhance financial system 
capacity and better align with global financial system 
needs. Conduct diagnostics of the operational 
capabilities of commercial banks participating in the 
initiative and key regulatory bodies; develop technical 
assistance plans and provide support to implement 
institutions reconnect with the global financial 
system (figure B5.1.1). The FSI is being delivered under 
the following two phases:
them. The independent diagnostics will improve 
credibility of selected financial institution (FI) and 
national systems and help create trustworthy 
entity-level disaggregated risk assessments of FIs. 
FSI technical assistance will improve the internal 
processes and systems (such as AML/CFT) of 
selected FIs and strengthen related oversight and the 
regulatory and policy environment. These diagnostic 
and capacity enhancements are expected to facilitate 
the reduction of gaps between global standards and 
Somali financial system standards and encourage 
collaboration (correspondent banking partnerships, 
investor interest, and so on) with Somali financial 
institutions.
Re-linking Somalia to the global financial system through capacity enhancements
FIGURE B5.1.1 PROMOTING CORRESPONDENT BANKING RELATIONSHIPS IN SOMALIA:  
KEY STAKEHOLDERS OF FSI 
KEY STAKEHOLDERS
Somali financial 
institutions (Fls)
Correspondent 
banks/development 
finance institutions
Federal 
government of 
Somalia
Development 
partners (e.g., UK, 
US, EU) & World Bank
Open channels of 
communication 
facilitate 
understanding, 
trust, commitment
=== PAGE 111 ===
|  89  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Various Sector-Specific Constraints Limit the Development of the  
Somali Financial Sector
Supply Side: Gaps in the Legal, Regulatory, and Supervisory Frameworks
Strong oversight capacity is critical to ensure appropriate checks and balances are in 
place for the financial system’s stability, as well as for appropriate policy development 
for prioritizing reforms and facilitating development of financial services to support 
individuals and businesses. Despite substantial progress over past years, the legal and 
regulatory financial sector framework needs to be further strengthened. As discussed 
earlier, several laws are in various stages of upgrading and development. Furthermore, 
besides strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, it is also important to ensure 
their enforcement. These institutional and regulatory gaps in the financial sector, along 
with weaknesses in the Central Bank Act that allow only limited tools for effective 
financial stability, do not instill confidence in the system for consumers, investors, and 
those wanting to transact with the system. For example, though AML/CFT laws and 
related regulation and guidance to financial institutions are in place, their ineffective 
enforcement by banks results in only a handful of suspicious transaction reports being 
submitted by financial institutions, defeating the purpose of their intent. Similarly, 
investors shy away from doing business with FIs perceived to be under supervised. The 
lack of CBRs is significantly related to the low levels of confidence in banks’ compliance 
with AML/CFT regulation and concern regarding the financial status of the banks, given 
the fledgling nature of the oversight system. A more progressive and open Islamic banking 
framework and a platform for the coordination of key stakeholders is also lacking. These 
improvements would provide the additional flexibility needed for the development and 
provision of a wider range of products and services, including those which leverage digital 
technologies. Furthermore, limited use of business development services (BDS) constrains 
FIs in their efforts to strengthen their capacity and fill any information gaps to support 
business development and explore new products and services. 
The government of Somalia recognizes the institutional and regulatory gaps in the 
financial sector and has been consistently undertaking reforms in response. The CBS 
Strategic Plan (2020–2024) supports a transition of the CBS from a fiscal agent of the 
government to a more policy-oriented institution. As part of this plan, the CBS has been 
slowly but gradually strengthening the legal framework (table 5.2). Regulatory capacity 
building is ongoing through new regulations, guidance, and directives to the industry 
in priority areas, as well as through the strengthening of supervisory function through 
staffing and training. As per recent updates from CBS,142 the institution has so far issued 
nine prudential regulations, four guidelines for commercial banks, six regulations covering 
nonbanking institutions (five regarding MTBs and one regarding MMOs), and one AML/
CFT regulation for the financial sector. The Capital Adequacy and Liquidity Management 
regulation has also been updated recently. The National Payments System Bill and a 
Takaful Bill are expected to be enacted in the last quarter of 2023. The Central Bank Act 
from 2012 is under revision to strengthen CBS’s ability to maintain financial stability in 
the country, and a new financial institutions law is expected to be enacted in 2023. The 
implementation of these new and upgraded laws and regulations will require continued 
capacity building and upgrading for effective oversight of the fast-growing system. 
Therefore, CBS has also been undertaking significant reforms to advance its capacity, 
organizational structure, and governance, with the support of the World Bank and other 
development partners. For example, CBS has staffed the nonbanking department in 
anticipation of the new laws, upgraded its human resources systems, introduced programs 
to incentivize staff members to upgrade their technical skills, and introduced stronger 
merit- and technical-qualification–based career promotions.
=== PAGE 112 ===
|  90  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
However, many weaknesses remain in the government’s oversight of the financial sector. 
For example, on-site supervision of banks is limited to only once every two years. The 
laws currently do not have provisions for covering supervision of the nonbanking 
sector (such as microfinance and MMOs), and the related regulation remains deficient 
compared to global standards on several aspects of those laws. The lack of a strong 
Islamic banking framework and a limited ability to supervise the fast-growing  
e-payments are just two constraints that inhibit the financial sector’s stability and 
growth. Similarly, financial integrity—critical to ensuring stability and building 
confidence in the system—continues to remain a high risk despite the government’s 
efforts. In 2022 the FGS—with support from the Financial Reporting Center, Somalia’s 
financial intelligence unit—published its first National Risk Assessment on money 
laundering and terrorism financing threats and vulnerabilities, marking a significant 
milestone for Somalia. A road map to implement the assessment’s recommendations 
has been developed, but implementation has been slow. Somalia also passed a Targeted 
Financial Sanctions Law earlier in 2023 that reinforces existing legal and regulatory 
frameworks. Furthermore, Somali authorities are currently preparing for the upcoming 
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENA-FATF) mutual 
evaluation scheduled for mid-2024. Participating in the mutual evaluation would be 
a critical step toward candid discussion of AML/CFT risk perceptions. Nevertheless, 
a stronger enforcement of supervisory actions concerning AML/CFT regulations, 
know-your-customer/customer due diligence (KYC/CDD) operations, and Suspicious 
Transaction Reporting is needed. Somalia suffers from (a) persistent AML/CFT risks 
because of the ongoing threat of violent extremism, (b) current gaps in the country’s 
systems to address those risks, and (c) inadequate KYC/CDD protocols. These 
difficulties with security elevate Somalia’s risk profile. For instance, existing KYC/CDD 
activities are processed manually, which makes evaluating clients time consuming, 
operationally demanding, expensive, inefficient, and unreliable. Furthermore, Somalia’s 
security situation limits freedom of movement and thereby hampers efforts to conduct 
field visits to FIs’ offices. This prevents regulators, potential foreign investors, and 
correspondent banks from fully assessing organizations’ financial, governmental, and 
programmatic capabilities and facilities to mitigate financial crimes. 
The institutional and regulatory gaps in the financial sector, along with weaknesses 
in the Central Bank Act that allow only limited tools for effective financial stability, 
constrain confidence in the system for consumers, investors, and those wanting to 
transact with the system. For example, though AML/CFT laws and related regulation 
and guidance to financial institutions are in place, their ineffective enforcement by 
banks results in only a handful of suspicious transaction reports being submitted 
by financial institutions, defeating the purpose of their intent. Similarly, investors 
shy away from doing business with FIs perceived to be under supervised. The lack 
of CBRs is significantly related to the low confidence in banks’ compliance with 
AML/CFT regulation and concern regarding the financial status of the banks, given 
the fledgling nature of the oversight system. A more progressive and open Islamic 
Banking framework and a platform for the coordination of key stakeholders is also 
lacking. These improvements would provide the additional flexibility needed for the 
development and provision of a wider range of products and services, including through 
the use of digital technologies. Furthermore, limited use of BDS constrains FIs in their 
efforts to strengthen their capacity and fill any information gaps to support business 
development and explore new products and services. Addressing these gaps is critical for 
strengthening the business enabling environment.
=== PAGE 113 ===
|  91  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
TABLE 5.2 FINANCIAL SECTOR LAWS AND REGULATIONS
Existing Laws
Forthcoming Laws
Central Bank Act (2012)
Financial Institutions Law (2012)
AML & CFT Act (2016)
Targeted Financial Sanctions Law (2023)
Financial Institutions Law (revised) (2024)
Takaful Insurance Law (2024)
National Payment System Law (2024)
AML & CFT Act (revised) (2024)
Central Bank Act (revised) (2024)
Traditional Insurance Law (2024)
Existing Regulations for Commercial Banks
Existing Guidelines for Commercial Banks
Licensing (2014)
Capital Adequacy (2015/2023)
Liquidity Risk Management (2015/2023)
Regulation on Audited Financial Statements (2016)
Audit Committee (2016)
Related Person Transactions (2016)
Opening and Closing Branch Offices (2016)
Asset classification and Provisioning (2018)
AML/CFT Regulation (2019) [FRC]
Corporate Governance (2018)
Operational Risk (2020)
Shariah Governance Framework (2020)
Islamic Financial Reporting & Accounting (2020)
Existing Regulations for Money Transfer 
Businesses
Existing Regulation for Mobile Money Operators
Registration (2014)
Licensing (2014)
AML (2015)
Customer Registration (2016)
Operations (2016)
Mobile Money Regulation (2020)
Existing Circulars for Licensed Financial 
Institutions
Other Existing and Forthcoming Relevant Laws
New requirements to introduce Anti-Counterfeit 
Currency Measures by Licensed Financial Institutions 
in Somalia (Circular No.1 of 2021)
Additional Requirements to Strengthen Anti-
Counterfeit Currency Measures & Acceptance of $50 
Note by Financial Institutions (Circular No. 2 of 2021)
National ID Law (2023)
Data Protection Law (2023)
Cybersecurity Law (2024)
Source: 	 Adapted from Mustafe Abdi, Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion in Somalia (National Economic Council of Somalia, 
2022) and updated by the CPSD team.
Note: 	
AML/CFT = anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of terrorism; FRC = Financial Reporting Center.
=== PAGE 114 ===
|  92  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Supply Side: Nascent Capacity of Financial Institutions 
Even though some of the FIs in Somalia have a reasonably long history, their 
products and services, risk-taking abilities, and outreach remain limited. The banking 
sector—which offers a full menu of services, including depositing, lending, and transfers 
and payments—is dominated by a few banks. The capture of e-wallets by one bank, 
is one clear example of the challenges that smaller banks have, when competing in 
and entering into new and growing markets. The recently established Somali Bankers 
Association is slowly attempting to improve coordination among its members and build 
mutual trust. Given a limited ability to understand and manage risk, banks currently 
engage in limited sectors. In particular, productive sectors (such as agriculture, fisheries, 
and livestock) are seen as high risk and remain underserviced. Islamic banking in its 
rudimentary form provides no-cost deposits for banks, which limits the incentives 
to innovate and develop new products and services. While over past years banks 
have started to offer a more diverse menu of services (such as MSME, corporate, and 
consumer or housing finance), the primary instrument is still murabaha (cost-plus 
financing). A weak capacity and a limited understanding of the sector, company, 
and customer risk profiles lead to heavy reliance on high collateral and guarantor 
requirements. On the nonbank side, microfinance institutions play an important role in 
supporting the relatively weaker segments of the population, but the sector has limited 
access to funds —in part because of the lack of any formal supervision, which raises 
the risk profile of these institutions for investors. It must be highlighted that efforts are 
underway to strengthen banks’ and MFIs’ ability to serve these underserved segments, 
including through the Gargaara Facility (box 5.2). MTBs, which dominate the money 
transfers in and out of the country, do not offer any other services, and their compliance 
with AML/CFT requirements is difficult to evaluate because they are not currently 
being actively supervised by the CBS (which is expected to change with the passage of 
the amended Financial Institutions Law). Furthermore, training opportunities for staff 
members and personnel of financial institutions are limited and the inflow of a skilled 
workforce is severely constrained owing to the country’s overall security situation. 
Supply Side: Financial Infrastructure Progress and Limitations 
The launch of the National Payment System (NPS) by the CBS in August 2021 was 
an important milestone for financial infrastructure development; however, other 
critical pieces are missing. The system has been adopted by all commercial banks 
and will integrate automatic clearing house (ACH), real-time gross settlement, and 
instant funds transfer functionalities within a single platform. It will also contain links 
between the CBS and the commercial banks to prepare for scaling up Somalia’s use of 
digital payments. The launch of the NPS is expected to boost trade and business and 
promote financial inclusion by facilitating efficient, low-cost, and fast transactions in 
a secure manner. The NPS is also expected to strengthen the overall financial stability 
and integrity of the system, as well as facilitate Somalia’s integration with the global 
financial system. In 2022, the NPS facilitated 922,904 transactions with a total value of 
US$1.4 billion (figure 5.10). However, the Somalia Payment Switch (SPS) has been much 
delayed, and focused effort is needed for its operationalization. The SPS would allow 
banks to connect their ATMs and point-of-sale terminals to a single national network, 
making card payments interoperable. The lack of an operational SPS also limits the 
implementation of the IBAN (international bank account number) and QR code 
initiatives, which are given high priority by CBS.
=== PAGE 115 ===
|  93  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
From the perspective of access to finance, several key pieces of financial infrastructure 
and related enabling institutions are also lacking. There is no collateral and centralized 
credit information system or credit bureau in Somalia, and each bank operates with 
its own databases of clients and depositors. Clear land and collateral titling would 
over time help change the culture to slowly move away from requiring guarantors 
and facilitate access to credit. Similarly, effective credit reporting systems can help 
mitigate a number of market failures that are common in financial markets and most 
severely apparent in less developed economies.144 The lack of clear collateral and 
information on institutional and firm borrowers limits banks’ abilities in taking risks 
and expanding their outreach beyond the handful of repeat or “safe” borrowers in 
their own databases. A credit bureau would enable FIs to offer more tailored collateral 
and lending requirements. This would, in turn, allow for wider outreach and product 
offerings. Good credit history could serve as “reputational collateral” for accessing 
formal credit beyond established lending relationships, particularly benefiting SMEs and 
new borrowers with limited physical collateral. Another major limitation in Somalia 
is the lack of established risk-sharing mechanisms such as a public credit guarantee 
scheme. Without such a mechanism, banks do not feel confident to take on more risk, 
and they remain limited in the sectors and customers they provide services to. The high 
level of cash on bank balance sheets is a clear sign of their risk averseness. 
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
FIGURE 5.10 GROWTH OF THE NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEM 
Source: 	 Central Bank of Somalia, “Policy Brief 002/2023: Somalia’s Financial Sector”  
(Mogadishu, Somalia: Central Bank of Somalia, May 2023).143
Note: 	
ACH = automatic clearing house; Q = quarter; RTGS = real-time gross settlement.
US$, millions
              Q3	
           Q4
2021
              Q1	                 	
     Q2                                  Q3	
  Q4
 2022
188.1
214.1
221.4
348.1
401.3
455.3
92.8
95.3
118.1
96
146.5
74.9
258.7
89.4
87.5
115.6
313.8
339.7
RTGS      ACH      Total value
=== PAGE 116 ===
|  94  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Supply Side: Lack of a National ID 
The lack of a national ID to allow for proper KYC/CDD assessments remains a key 
factor limiting access to financial services in Somalia (box 6.2). Application of e-KYC 
facilitated by a national digital ID, which is in its early stages of implementation as of 
September 2023, could significantly facilitate financial inclusion by streamlining identity 
verification processes. This, in turn, could boost the use of formal financial institutions 
and potentially provide safer and faster transfer of funds from the diaspora through the 
development of CBRs.
BOX 5.2 NATIONAL DIGITAL ID USES AND BENEFITS FOR FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT
The National ID law was passed in March 2023 and 
the Somalia National ID launched on September 16, 
2023. NIRA plans to enroll 10 million individuals by the 
end of 2026 and is targeting the financial and telecom 
sectors for operationalizing the use of the national 
ID. The national ID offers several opportunities 
that can enhance financial access and economic 
empowerment. Figure B6.3.1 lists key uses and 
potential benefits that a national ID can offer.
TABLE B5.3.1 NATIONAL DIGITAL ID USES AND BENEFITS
Source: 	 Harish Natarajan, Mandepanda Sharmista Appaya, and Sriram Balasubramanian,  
“G20 Digital Identity Onboarding (English)” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2018), http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/362991536649062411/G20-Digital-Identity-Onboarding.
Note: 	
G2B = government-to-business; G2P = government-to-person. 
PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
RELYING PARTY
INDIVIDUALS
CUSTOMER DUE 
DILIGENCE
E-SIGNATURE
CONSUMER 
CONSENT
USES
BENEFITS
Identity theft and fraud prevention
Easier tracking
Improved document management and recording
Integration with mobile platforms
G2B & G2P payments
Better credit scoring
Reduction of gender gap
BETTER 
AUTHENTICATION
Single customer view
Reduced cost and increased efficiency
Frictionless transactions
Access to credit, savings, 
insurance
Streamlined tax  
collection
Better AML/CFT controls
Easier account opening
Greater transparency
G2P payments
Role in humanitarian 
assistance
Improved customer services
More efficient social 
programs
Ability to leverage value of 
legal IDs
Reduction of gender 
gap
Potential of interoperability
=== PAGE 117 ===
|  95  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Demand-Side Constraints 
A review of existing documentation and industry discussions indicates that there is 
also a range of demand-side constraints to the development of the financial sector. 
A lack of physical access to bank branches (due to a concentration in urban areas 
and security challenges), a lack of proper documentation to open accounts or access 
banking services, and, perhaps most importantly, a lack of adequate collateral and 
access to guarantors are important constraints (particularly for smaller firms and the 
most vulnerable population segments). Scarce sector-specific data also limits business 
proposal development as well as their evaluation by the financial sector. Furthermore, 
financial awareness and literacy are extremely limited in the country. Weak financial 
literacy limits opportunities for lenders and borrowers to connect,145 and the lack 
of adequate financial awareness limits the demand of appropriate products and 
services. Finally, industry stakeholders and policy makers suggested in discussions 
that individuals and private sector firms are further discouraged from using formal 
financial services and seeking tailored financial products (including digital financial 
services) by a fragmented understanding and application of Islamic banking practices 
and by the scarcity of PPD platforms and consumer forums. Specific supply and demand 
constraints related to women’s access to finance are discussed in box 5.3.
BOX 5.3 GENDER AND ACCESS TO FINANCE
While there are no sex-disaggregated statistics on 
access to financial services in Somalia, evidence from 
household and enterprise surveys as well as qualitative 
studies on entrepreneurship constraints suggests that 
women are less likely than men to rely on credit as a 
source of business finance. Similarly, women-owned 
household enterprises in Somaliland, Mogadishu, 
and Bosaso are more likely to cite access to finance 
as a constraint to enterprise than male-owned 
comparators. Furthermore, compared to men, women 
household heads and entrepreneurs are less likely 
to apply and be approved for loans from financial 
institutions or access alternate modes of financing.
Demand-Side Constraints
•	 Limited land ownership and property rights, 
which are the main and traditional sources 
of collateral in the absence of alternate credit 
assessment models, are the chief constraints on 
women’s access to credit in Somalia. Nearly two 
thirds of Somali women do not own land and more 
than 80 percent do not own any property, owing 
to prevailing restrictions on women’s inheritance 
and property rights under sharia and Xeer law. 
•	 Prohibitive borrowing costs and a high 
self-perceived risk of default associated 
with loans from financial institutions also 
suppress women’s access to credit. Women-
owned businesses in Somalia typically have lower 
and more irregular income streams than do male-
owned comparators. This leads them to prefer 
informal sources of credit, such as borrowing from 
saving groups as well as family and friends, which 
have smaller principal amounts, lower interest 
rates, extended durations, and flexible repayment 
options.
•	 Most women entrepreneurs lack awareness 
about financial products. A randomized 
survey of women entrepreneurs in Mogadishu 
and Hargeisa found that over 82 percent of 
respondents were not aware of different credit 
and financing options available to them. Women 
who rely on alternate modes of financial access, 
such as mobile money services, often lack the 
required level of literacy and numeracy to use 
these services effectively.
•	 As women are less mobile than men, it 
is difficult for them to access financial 
institution services, especially from rural 
areas. Most financial institutions, especially banks, 
are situated in urban areas.
=== PAGE 118 ===
|  96  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Supply-Side Constraints
•	
Somalia lacks legislation that prohibits gender 
discrimination in provision of credit. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that even when women are able 
to provide collateral against a loan application, 
they are required by banks to have a male 
guarantor.
•	
The lack of a movable collateral registry has a 
disproportionate impact on the female market 
segment. Movable assets are typically more 
women-owned than immovable assets are, and 
they have the potential to be used as collateral.
•	
Somalia lacks a national financial inclusion 
strategy targeting unserved and underserved 
market segments, including women-headed 
households and women-owned businesses. 
Financial institutions lack incentives to 
disaggregate customer, portfolio, and staffing data 
by sex. In the absence of such data and targets, the 
financial sector lacks incentives to report on and 
improve the share of women it employs. This is 
particularly relevant for conservative contexts such 
as Somalia, where female customers expect to 
engage with service providers and staff members 
of the same gender.
Positive Developments 
Over the years, interest has been growing to use 
policy and regulatory incentives to address gender 
gaps in financial inclusion and credit access. The CBS 
is planning a financial inclusion survey and considering 
developing a financial inclusion strategy that could 
include tailored gender considerations. Recent efforts 
to establish and refine the NPS also hold promise 
for the women’s market segment, particularly 
through a potential development of digital financial 
services. For example, channeling government social 
security payments through an interoperable digital 
payments system could bridge the gender gap in 
account ownership and create a critical mass of 
potential female customers. Somalia already has 
some of the elements to emulate such outcomes, 
including (a) a unified social registry and a system for 
disbursing social cash transfers through mobile money 
platforms, (b) a fast-growing use of e-wallets, and 
(c) a national digital ID system, currently in its early 
stages of implementation, which can promote know-
your-customer (KYC) and limit women’s reliance on 
informal identification and verification.
Source: 	 Staff compilation based on World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum—Towards an Inclusive Jobs 
Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021); Mustafe Abdi, Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion in 
Somalia (National Economic Council of Somalia, 2022); Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia 
Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 2023; UNFPA, “Housing and Household Assets 
of the Somali People,” (Nairobi, Kenya: UNFPA, 2016); World Bank, “Women, Business and the Law” (World 
Bank, Washington, DC, 2021); International Labour Organization, “Sectoral Assessment of Women’s  
Entrepreneurship Development in the Agriculture and Renewable Energy Sectors in Somalia,” 2020;  
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “Somali Health and Demographic Survey 2020,” 2020.
=== PAGE 119 ===
|  97  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Private Sector Opportunities
Notwithstanding the challenges noted earlier, ongoing reform efforts present growing 
opportunities for private sector investments in Somalia’s financial sector. The upcoming 
MENA-FATF mutual evaluation will be an important milestone for Somalia’s 
financial sector, as it will show the country’s commitment to integrate with the global 
financial system by openly evaluating its compliance with international standards and 
developing plans to address related gaps. This would, in turn, help facilitate CBRs and 
other business partnerships. Furthermore, initiatives such as the Gargaara program 
and the FSI, which are strongly supported by development partners, offer banks an 
opportunity to improve AML/CFT compliance and business capacity to manage risks 
and strengthen internal controls. With a national digital ID launched in September 
2023 and rollout planned over the next few years, electronic-KYC and CDD will be 
significantly improved. An integrated national financial inclusion strategy, combined 
with several reforms underway to strengthen oversight over the financial industry, will 
increase investor confidence and open up new opportunities for business partnerships 
and investments in Somalia’s financial sector. In this context, the most promising short- 
to medium-term private sector opportunities are highlighted as follow:
Digital Financial Services
Leveraging high levels of telecommunications and smartphone access offers 
opportunities for business development. The rapid expansion of digital wallet use 
in Somalia indicates basic literacy levels in the use of technology for payments. 
Opportunities exist for the regulator to play a facilitating role in building the digital 
financial services (DFS) ecosystem—for example, through a sandbox approach—to 
encourage innovation and the development of innovative credit and payment products. 
The focus of the regulator could be to incentivize the private sector to develop (a) 
merchant payments and credit products, (b) customized consumer credit, (c) targeted 
or automatic contractual savings, and (d) insurance products. DFS have the ability 
to reach underserved segments, including women in particular.146 However, this will 
require stronger PPD to foster collaboration between the business community, banks, 
and telecommunications providers, as well as enable regulations and Islamic banking 
compliance–related support. All these areas offer further opportunities for the private 
sector to participate on the supply and demand side.
Trade Finance
With a predominantly import-oriented economy and a growing need for efficient 
international trade transactions, there is a burgeoning demand for trade finance services 
in Somalia. Private investors can play a pivotal role in establishing trade finance 
facilities, facilitating the smooth flow of goods, and supporting local businesses engaged 
in trade activities. By providing crucial financing instruments such as letters of credit, 
trade credit insurance, and export/import financing, investors can stimulate economic 
growth, create job opportunities, and contribute to the development of Somalia’s 
financial sector. However, it is essential for investors to navigate the unique challenges, 
including security concerns and regulatory complexities, while conducting thorough 
due diligence to ensure the success and sustainability of their trade finance investments 
in this dynamic market. For example, IFC is in the final stages of preparing both an 
external due diligence (EDD) and an AML/CFT framework assessment for a few 
financial institutions operating in Somalia, with a view to evaluate their eligibility for a 
potential trade finance line under IFC’s Global Trade Finance Program.
=== PAGE 120 ===
|  98  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
Microfinance
There has been a growing demand for microcredit in Somalia over past years, and this 
trend is expected to continue,147 with a largely unbanked population and a growing 
number of MSMEs. It is estimated that less than 5 percent of Somali MSMEs’ needs 
for financing are being met, which suggests a market of over 2 million MSME clients 
across Somalia,148 many of which are prevented from accessing conventional enterprise 
financing channels because of informality, a lack of personal collateral, irregular 
income streams, and a lack of security deposits or guarantors.149 Against this backdrop, 
establishing MFIs in underserved regions and investing in or partnering with existing 
MFIs and MSME-focused lenders not only represents strategic untapped investment 
opportunities, but also could serve as a catalyst for transformative socioeconomic 
development in the country. Such investments would empower underserved 
communities, bolster MSMEs’ development and entrepreneurship, create jobs, and 
promote financial inclusion, among others. However, to unlock these investment 
opportunities, targeted polices and reforms to address the aforementioned constrains 
from the supply and demand side are required. These policies and reforms include 
establishing a regulatory framework that fosters the development of MFIs (such as 
by developing a microfinance law), developing a credit information system, providing 
risk mitigation mechanisms, offering tax incentives, strengthening investor protection, 
promoting technology adoption, encouraging public-private partnerships, and 
improving financial education and literacy. These reforms would, inter alia, help reduce 
investment risks, enhance investor confidence, and foster growth in the microfinance 
sector, thereby contributing to Somalia’s economic development, poverty reduction, and 
financial inclusion.
Insurance
Somalia, a nation in dire need of effective risk management solutions, presents a 
compelling yet largely untapped investment opportunity in the realm of insurance. As 
the country’s economy continues to evolve and its formal financial sector gradually 
emerges, the demand for insurance services, especially in priority value chains (such as 
livestock, crops, fisheries, and construction) and against natural disasters, is steadily 
on the rise. Despite the pressing need for insurance, the market in Somalia remains 
significantly underdeveloped, offering limited access to insurance products and services. 
This unique situation creates an alluring prospect for investors and insurers alike, who 
can introduce innovative solutions tailored to address the specific challenges faced by 
this nation. Overcoming the aforementioned supply- and demand-side constraints, as 
well as addressing sector-specific obstacles like limited awareness about the importance 
and availability of insurance, the absence of local reinsurance/retakaful companies, 
and weak institutional and regulatory frameworks governing the industry,150 will be 
critical to unlocking the full potential of the insurance market in Somalia. To this end, 
notable reforms are already underway, including the drafting of an insurance bill in 
2020, which, once enacted, will enhance the regulation and oversight of insurance and 
Takaful businesses in the country. In addition, Somalia’s membership in the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) since February 2020 offers promising prospects 
by attracting private sector investors and lenders, fostering entrepreneurship, and 
stimulating foreign direct investment within the insurance sector.
=== PAGE 121 ===
|  99  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Notes
1.         For instance, in-depth analysis of the high-potential value chains in the agricultural sector are very scarce.
2.	
Through the ESMAP-developed Multi-Tier Framework (MTF), steps are being taken to obtain a more reliable baseline.
3.	
IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, and WHO, “Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report 2023,” World Bank, Washington, DC, 
2023. 
4.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey (SIHBS)—Main Report,” February 2023.
5.	
While there is insufficient data on how household access varies by gender (especially in rural areas), female entrepreneurs have 
cited electricity and affordability issues across multiple studies. For more information on this front, see the following: World 
Bank, Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey (Washington, DC: World 
Bank, 2019), https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/32323); African Development Bank and UN Women, “Country 
Gender Profile, Republic of Somalia: Trends of Change in a Fragile and Fragmented Context,” (Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: African 
Development Bank Group, 2020), https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/somalia-country-gender-profile; International 
Labour Organization, “Sectoral Assessment of Women’s Entrepreneurship Development in the Agriculture and Renewable 
Energy Sectors in Somalia,” 2020, https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/---ifp_seed/
documents/publication/wcms_757371.pdf; and World Bank, Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs 
Agenda (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2021), https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35943.
6.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan: Development of a Power Master Plan for Somali Project,” October 2018.
7.	
Jami Nelson Nuñez, “Powering Progress: The Potential of Renewable Energy in Somalia,” One Earth Future Foundation, 
February 2015, www.shuraako.org/publications. 
8.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.” 
9	
World Bank, Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project (Project Appraisal Document, November 2021).
10.	
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC), Cost of Service Study (COS) Manual, 2021, https://
www.naruc.org/international/news/new-cost-of-service-study-manual-developed-to-help-ethiopian-energy-
sector-stakeholders-design-cost-based-electricity-rates-and-expand-electricity-access/#:~:text=According%20to%20
information%20from%20the,%240.04%20and%20%240.06%20per%20kWh; GlobalPetrolPrices.com (database), “Kenya 
Electricity Prices,” https://www.globalpetrolprices.com/Kenya/electricity_prices/.
11.	
World Bank, “Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy: Sustaining the Momentum” (World Bank, Washington, DC, 2020). 
12.	
Supplying Somalia’s main urban centers, including Mogadishu, Hargeisa, Berbera, Burao, Baidoa, and Kismayo.
13.	
Even firms owned and operated by the government produced power themselves. For more information on this topic, see 
Emma Lochery, “Generating Power: Electricity Provisions and State Formation in Somaliland,” (PhD thesis, Oxford University, 
2015).
14.	
Consultations with MoEWR officials in Mogadishu, January 2023.
15.	
Unstable political environments raise the costs of monitoring and enforcing property rights.
16.	
Emma Lochery, “Generating Power”; Roland Marchal, A Survey of Mogadishu’s Economy (Nairobi, Kenya: European Commission, 
2002).
17.	
Although in a few cases, lines that allow for longer-distance distribution (such as 11 kilovolt to 33 kilovolt) are also used to 
feed low-voltage feeders. 
18.	
An island network is an electrical energy network capable of operating independently of another electrical network and grid. 
19.	
World Bank, Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project. Independent power producers and NGOs also contribute at a smaller 
scale. A partially public electricity supply exists in very limited instances.
20.	
World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government—Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow 
and Prosper (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022).
21.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.” These estimates include urban, rural, and IDP populations but exclude nomads, as 
their lifestyle precludes them from using on-grid electricity.
22.	
World Bank, “Petroleum Sector Governance Note,” Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2022).
23.	
Abdullahi Mohamed Samatar et al, “The Utilization and Potential of Solar Energy in Somalia: Current State and Prospects,” 
Energy Strategy Reviews 48 (July 2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2023.101108.
24.	
Electricity penetration estimates are far from accurate in Somalia as there is little historical data on ESP customer additions. 
However, directional trends on this front are unmistakable.
25.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.” 
26.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
27.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.”
=== PAGE 122 ===
|  100  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
28.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.” While data collected by the 2022 Somalia Integrated Household Budget Survey 
(SIHBS) provides different numbers on access to electricity, the directional insights remain the same.
29.	
IFC, "Somaliland Electricity Diagnostic" (internal document, International Finance Corporation, Washington, DC, 2021). 
30.	
African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia,” World Bank Lighting Africa, 2017. 
31.	
According to IFC consultations in 2020, the estimated cost of generation for many ESPs is so high that they lose money on 
low industrial tariffs. 
32.	
Abdullahi Mohamed Samatar et al, “The Utilization and Potential of Solar Energy in Somalia.”
33.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan”; African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia.” It is 
estimated that in the major urban centers alone, there are more than 220 HSDG systems that consume over 121,000 liters 
of diesel fuel per day. Most of these HSDGs have a generation capacity of less than 650 kW. Furthermore, according to 
World Bank forecasts, it is projected that with increasing demand for electricity, diesel consumption could increase to about 
700,000 liters per day in the medium term if additional capacity is to be met by HSDGs alone.
34.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
35.	
This includes added costs like taxation for transportation by government entities and Al-Shabaab. Consultations with private 
sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, January 2023.
36.	
“Wet stacking” is a condition caused by operating the engine at light load for extended periods, sending unburned fuel and 
soot into the exhaust system.
37.	
That is, most ESPs are operating their HSDGs at levels that are considerably below their optimal performance because of a 
range of issues (such as the frequency of light loads).
38.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.” Thus, large institutions need to contract two or more separate ESPS in parallel, have 
their own captive HSDG generation, or add a captive solar PV grid to the mini-grid systems.
39.	
 Data from CPCS collected for the capacity building strategy for the MoEWR in March 2023. This level of power loss is about 
quadruple the average power losses across Africa and more than double the power losses across FCV countries. 
40.	
Leakage current and open circuit losses derive from network equipment and fixed elements and are more difficult to fix. 
Other issues lead to variable technical losses (such as elevated line impedances, contact resistances, and Joule heating) and 
are more easily fixed.
41.	
Because of metering issues, some ESPs charge a fixed fee based on an estimation of the consumer load, providing a 
disincentive for end-users to reduce equipment use or buy energy-efficient products.
42.	
This is especially acute for ESPs within cities with multiple ESPs (such as Mogadishu, Bosaso, Abduwak, Guriel, Hargeisa, 
Burao, Laascaanood, Borama, and Wajaale). 
43.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.”
44.	
For instance, the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) vaccine projects.
45.	
African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia.”
46.	
Including stockists, designers, marketing agents, and installers of solar equipment.
47.	
 Like using resellers and other multi-branch retailers in peri-urban and rural markets.
48.	
Including stockists, designers, marketing agents, and installers of solar equipment.
49.	
These brands provide integrators not only with equipment but also with design and installation support.
50.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
51.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
52.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
53.	
It is estimated that the majority of small-scale and pico-solar PV products are sold by generalist retailers. 
54.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
55.	
Several initiatives have been implemented on this front. For instance, the World Bank Somali Electricity Access Project 
supported the installation of more than 34,000 quality-verified solar home systems by 23 solar service providers in rural and 
peri-urban areas. 
56.	
African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia.”
57.	
Consultations in Mogadishu, January and June 2023. 
58.	
African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia.” According to a 2017 survey supported by 
the World Bank, the estimated market demand for off-grid solar PV products in Somalia was in excess of 32 MW. Given 
population growth and trends in recent years, this demand has likely increased since.
=== PAGE 123 ===
|  101  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
59.	
IBS and World Bank, Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP)—Project Completion Report, June 2022.
60.	
According to a 2017 survey supported by the World Bank, most urban, rural, pastoralist, and IDP households would be willing 
to pay for off-grid solar PV electricity, especially if some sort of financing mechanism (such as a loan or PayGo system) were 
provided.
61.	
Consultations in Mogadishu, January and June 2023.
62.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; Consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
63.	
 Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, January 2023; Consultations with private sector 
stakeholders in Hargeisa, November 2022.
64.	
Steps have also been taken on this front with regional governments. For instance, in Somaliland, a Quality Assurance unit 
was established, Lighting Global and IEC Standards (such as quality standards 62257-9-8 and IEC 62257-9-5 Test methods) 
have been adopted, government staff members have been trained on quality standards (such as on IEC 62257-9-8 quality 
Standards & IEC 62257-9-5 Test methods for Pico solar and SHS products), and a series of dissemination workshops for IEC 
SHS kit and solar lantern standards have been implemented.
65.	
IBS and World Bank, Somali Electricity Access Project. 
66.	
Consultations in Mogadishu, January and June 2023. 
67	
Lighting Global (website), “Energy for Prosperity,” https://www.lightingglobal.org/country/somalia/.
68	
Consultations in Mogadishu, January and June 2023. 
69	
Consultations in Mogadishu, January and June 2023.
70.	
Lighting Global, “Energy for Prosperity.”
71.	
Which primarily consist of lanterns and pico products to lower-income groups on a financed basis.
72	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
73.	
The FGS commissioned the “Preparation of an Indicative Least-Cost Geospatial Electrification Plan to Achieve Universal 
Access in Somalia” study implemented by the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2020.
74.	
An interconnected distribution network and a transmission grid might be a reality in the medium to long term with support 
from development institutions, but it is not yet a reality.
75.	
European Union Technical Assistance Facility, “The European Union Global Technical Assistance Facility for Sustainable 
Energy,” 2022. 
76.	
Global Solar Atlas, https://globalsolaratlas.info/.
77.	
African Development Bank, Somalia—Energy Sector Needs Assessment and Investment Programme (Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire: African 
Development Bank Group, November 2015).
78.	
With 63 GW from fixed-bottom wind turbines and 219 GW from floating installations. For more information on this topic, 
see a 2021 World Bank analysis of the country’s wind technical potential at https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/867151586844687058/pdf/Technical-Potential-for-Offshore-Wind-in-Somalia-Map.pdf.
79.	
While Somalia possesses hydroelectric potential of 100–150 MW annually, the historical variability in river flows has rendered 
this energy source unreliable, compounded by the absence of necessary electricity infrastructure for distribution. The feasibility 
of geothermal energy, despite Somalia’s proximity to the Rift Valley, remains uncertain because of a lack of relevant data. 
Recent studies suggest significant wave energy potential in Somali waters, but precise estimates are unavailable. Additionally, 
harnessing these energy sources relies on emerging technologies and requires technical expertise currently unavailable in 
Somalia.
80.	
IRENA, “Quality Infrastructure for Smart Mini-Grids” (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020).
81.	
World Bank, “Petroleum Sector Governance Note.”
82.	
This is being done primarily through solar PV solutions synchronized as part of a SPV-HSDG hybrid system, with the solar 
component providing daytime generation. There are also some wind power generators installed in Somalia, but only one of 
those (NECSOM’s 0.75 MW wind power generation plant) is functioning as part of a synchronized hybrid generation system.
83.	
SOMINVEST, “A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment in Somalia’s Energy Sector” (Somalia Energy Sector 
Investment Report, February 2022).
84.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.”
85.	
Consultations with energy firms and public sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Nairobi, November 2022 to 
August 2023.
86.	
The PayGo business model combines high-quality solar equipment with prepaid financing and low-cost operations, anchored 
in mobile money payments (alternative methods include scratch cards, mobile airtime, and cash).
=== PAGE 124 ===
|  102  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
87.	
African Solar Designs, Ltd, “Off-Grid Lighting Market Assessment for Somalia.” In Somalia and other countries in Sub-
Saharan Africa, off-grid solar solutions combined with PayGo financing models are increasingly being used to bridge access 
and affordability gaps and provide electricity access for poor households in areas not serviced by centralized grids. There 
is some evidence linking off-grid solar provided through PayGo financing to improvements in women’s health, time-use 
and participation in paid work and entrepreneurship, and financial inclusion. However, the body of evidence on the gender 
effects of this model is largely diffuse, partly because of the general lack of sex-disaggregated data on the customer base 
and their preferred products and financing models. For more information on this topic, see Sai Krishna Kumaraswamy, 
“Does PAYGo Solar Improve Women’s Lives? A Look at the Evidence,” CGAP (blog), April 14, 2021, https://www.cgap.org/blog/
does-paygo-solar-improve-womens-lives-look-evidence.
88.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey.” 
89.	
For instance, international manufacturers of solar PV products (such as Greenlight Planet) have provided technology to local 
energy enterprises on a PayGo basis.
90.	
Some initiatives on this are already being implemented. For instance, Power Africa and SparkMeter (a US-based digital 
energy technology company) met with Somali ESPs and developed five actionable recommendations that are now 
being implemented with NECSOM’s pilot of SparkMeter’s solution. For more information on this topic, see Power Africa, 
“Strengthening Power Grids in Somalia with Digital Technology,” Medium (website), August 16, 2022, https://powerafrica.
medium.com/strengthening-power-grids-in-somalia-with-digital-technology-3536d1889d3e. Similarly, according to the 
project completion report of the World Bank Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP), two of the solar PV firms supported 
by the project started to offer PayGo products (using SunKing products with the Angara PayGo system). Microdahab has 
also partnered with SolarGen to provide a “lease to purchase” product for solar pumping equipment. However, most of the 
market is still not offering PayGo products.
91.	
Because energy providers would need to negotiate pay-bill accounts with multiple telecommunications companies, increasing 
transaction costs.
92.	
The new interconnection regime was launched by NCA in March 2023. 
93	
With the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources being the granting authority for licenses until the Electricity Authority is fully 
operational.
94.	
These regulations (if adequately implemented) could help set a more even playing field and mitigate the risk of entry for 
foreign and international players. For instance, part of the tariff framework development process will include a synthesis of 
private sector cost data and cost unbundling processes to ensure a transparent and clear methodology in setting electricity 
tariffs.
95	
Although ongoing World Bank–financed projects are currently supporting the Somali government in further development of 
the legal and policy framework.
96.	
For instance, the World Bank Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP) supported targeted capacity-building activities for 
MoEWR such as the recruitment of Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff members, formal training, conferences, and 
seminars. USAID and other development partners have also provided institutional capacity building for electricity sector 
government institutions in the country. 
97.	
A recent assessment found that 90 percent of the MoEWR staff lacks the necessary skillsets. For more information see 
CPCS, Final Report—Consultancy Services for FRS Electricity Supply Industry Institutional Structure Study, 2021.
98.	
The State Agency for Water, Energy, and Natural Resources performs this role in Puntland, for instance. Separately, the 
Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MoEM) and the Somaliland Energy Commission (SEC) oversee and make key decisions for 
the electricity sector in Somaliland.
99.	
For example, BECO, ENEE, DAYAH, SOMPOWER, and TELESOM.
100.	 World Bank, Somali Electricity Sector Recovery Project.
101.	
Consultations with energy sector stakeholders, January 2023. 
102	
Mergers and acquisitions in Somalia have been taking place at the ownership level with owners of smaller ESPs becoming 
shareholders of larger ESPs. The merger of operational activities, however, has been slower, with the ability of ESPs to take 
advantage of economies of scale lagging. 
103.	
According to recent consultations with energy firms in Somalia, the consolidation of independent energy providers and small 
ESPs into larger ESPs has already had benefits for these firms’ consolidated financial and technical bottom lines. 
104.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
105.	
Consultations with energy firms and public sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Nairobi, November 2022 to 
August 2023.
106.	
Consultations with energy firms and public sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Nairobi, November 2022 to 
August 2023.
107.	
 Consultations with private equity funds currently assessing investments in the Somali energy sector, April 2023.
=== PAGE 125 ===
|  103  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
108.	
SOMINVEST, “A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.”
109.	
Recent focus group discussions conducted by SOMINVEST confirm technical skills gaps in these areas in value chains for 
off-grid systems. For more information on this front, see SOMINVEST, “A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.”
110.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
111.	
World Bank, “Tracking Employment Gender Gaps in the Somalia Energy Sector,” 2021 draft. 
112.	
One example is the Boosting Road Infrastructure Development and Growth of Energy (BRIDGES) project, financed by the EU 
and implemented by CARE. 
113.	
For instance, in the BRIDGES project, most trainees remain unemployed many months after training programs culminate. See 
CARE Somalia/Somaliland, “Final Report—Final Evaluation of TVET and Higher Education for Boosting Road Infrastructure 
Development and Growth of Energy Services (THE BRIDGES) Project,” August 2020, https://www.careevaluations.org/wp-
content/uploads/BRIDGES-Final-Evaluation-Report.pdf.
114.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
115.	
SOMINVEST, “A Roadmap to Unlocking Private Sector Investment.”
116.	
UNICON Limited, “Power Master Plan.”
117.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023.
118.	
Consultations with energy firms in Mogadishu, January 2023. A lack of sex- and location-disaggregated customer data 
also hinders the development of strategies to boost adoption in underserved market segments (such as female-headed 
households). For example, there is emerging evidence that female sales agents may outperform men as distributors of 
off-grid clean energy solutions, especially in culturally conservative contexts where women can leverage their access to 
the private domestic sphere to influence household-level decisions on energy usage. For more information on this topic, 
see ESMAP, “Gender Equality in the Off-Grid Solar Sector: Operational Handbook for Gender Equality in the Off-Grid 
Solar Sector” (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2022), https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/
dbf2bea8-5d88-5f1a-ba64-60d350ef71f3/content.
119.	
According to a survey completed for the 2019 FinAccess Household Survey in Kenya, 79.4 percent of the adult population in 
Kenya uses mobile money accounts. A more recent World Bank survey suggests that 97.0 percent of households in Somalia 
have access to mobile money.
120.	
World Bank, Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government. Furthermore, a recent household survey by Somalia’s 
National Bureau of Statistics noted that only 6.4 percent of women own accounts versus 11.5 percent of men. For more 
information on this front, see Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey.”
121.	
The World Bank 2017 mobile money survey shows that mobile money usage is highest in urban areas (83 percent), and 
in displaced persons camps in urban areas for people who depend on remittances (72 percent). Only 55 percent of rural 
residents use mobile money, and the gap between income groups is also large (96.9 percent among those earning more than 
US$500 use mobile money versus 59.8 percent of those earning between US$100 and US$150). 
122.	
World Bank, “Somalia Economic Update: Impact of COVID-19 Policies to Manage the Crisis and Strengthen Economic 
Recovery” (World Bank, Washington, DC, June 2020). 
123.	
Consultations with private sector stakeholders in Mogadishu, January 2023.
124.	
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, “Somalia Financial Sector: Technical Report” (UNIDO, Vienna, January 
2020). 
125.	
The figures included in this analysis are estimations and are subject to change. GDP figures for the year are based on the 
projections from International Monetary Fund (IMF), Somalia Sixth Review under the Extended Credit Facility Arrangement and 
Technical Assistance Report—National Accounts Statistics Mission  (Country Report 23/438, Washington, DC: IMF, December 20, 
2023) and from IMF, Technical Assistance Report—National Accounts Statistics Mission (Country Report 23/364, Washington, 
DC: IMF, November 9, 2023). 
126.	
Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, December 2023.
127.	
Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, December 2023.
128.	
Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, December 2023.
129.	
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2022 Article IV Consultation and Fourth Review under the Extended Credit Facility—Press Release; 
Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Somalia (Country Report 2022/375, Washington, DC: IMF, December 16, 
2022); IMF Country Report 2023/187; IMF, Somalia: Sixth Review under the Extended Credit Facility Arrangement (Country Report 
23/438, Washington, DC: IMF, December 20, 2023). 
130.	
Somali National Bureau of Statistics, “2022 Somalia Household Budget Survey.”
131.	
The banks identified are Agro Africa Bank, Amal Bank, Amana Bank, Bushra Business Bank, Dahabshil Bank International, 
Daryeel Bank, Galaxy International Bank, Idman Community Bank, International Bank of Somalia, MyBank, Premier Bank, 
Salaam Somali Bank, and SomBank.
=== PAGE 126 ===
|  104  |
	
ASSESSMENTS OF SECTORS WITH HIGHPOTENTIAL TO ACCELERATE SOMALIA’S DEVELOPMENT
132.	
Dara Salaam Bank is not included as it operates primarily in Somaliland and is not licensed by CBS.
133.	
EY, “Unleashing the Potential of FinTech in Banking,” 2017. 
134.	
Among those MMOs, only four have a license with CBS: Hormuud, SomTel, SomLink, and Golis. The other MMOs identified 
during research are TelSom, AmTel, and SolTelCo.
135.	
The MFIs identified are KIMS, Bushra, RAAS, Maal, Sahal, Amana, Tijaaro, MicroDahab, Midnimo, Kobciye, and Kaaba.
136.	
The insurance companies identified are First Somali Takaful and Re-takaful, Takaful Insurance of Africa, Baraka Takaful, 
SomTakaful, Horn of Africa Insurance, Salmastar Insurance, and Amanah Insurance.
137.	
World Bank FCI Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, 2023.
138.	
World Bank FCI Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, 2023.
139.	
World Bank FCI Central Bank of Somalia data analysis, 2023.
140.	
On the basis of CBS data, MTBs facilitated US$4.8 billion of remittance inflows to the country in 2022. See Central Bank of 
Somalia, “Policy Brief 002/2023.”
141.	
Unsurprisingly, the mobile money sector has low service standards and a limited redress mechanism for consumers.
142.	
Central Bank of Somalia, “Policy Brief 002/2023.”
143.	
Central Bank of Somalia, “Policy Brief 002/2023.”
144.	
World Bank (website), “Credit Registry,” https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/gfdr/gfdr-2016/background/
credit-registry.
145.	
Mustafe Abdi, Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion in Somalia (National Economic Council of Somalia, 2022).
146.	
World Bank (website), “Using Digital Solutions to Address Barriers to Female Entrepreneurship: A Toolkit.” 
147.	
Mustafe Abdi, Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion in Somalia.
148.	
Dominique Wells, “Accelerating Change in the Somali Microfinance Sector,” Innovest Advisory, September 16, 2022.
149.	
International Finance Corporation, “Somalia: Market Assessment of Financial Services” (IFC, Washington, DC, March 2022).
150.	
Mustafe Abdi, Access to Finance and Financial Inclusion in Somalia.
=== PAGE 127 ===
|  105  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
In light of Somalia’s FCV context, initiatives for private sector development must be 
carefully sequenced and designed not only to incentivize short-term dividends, but also 
to enable an economic transformation of the country in the medium to long term. The 
report highlights several recommendations to improve private sector development in 
Somalia, although it is important to note that structural challenges related to high levels 
of insecurity, governance challenges, and fragile state legitimacy significantly undermine 
the potential growth and inclusiveness of the private sector. What is possible in the 
short to medium term is limited because of the constraints to private sector development 
(such as, corruption, road checkpoints by armed groups, market distortions); in 
addition, the root causes of FCV must be addressed and significant progress must be 
made on the country’s broader state-building agenda. Relatedly, while mitigating the 
performance issues of key enabling sectors to foster an economic transformation in the 
medium to long term should be a priority, the types of interventions that are possible 
to resolve those performance issues in a post-HIPC environment are currently limited 
by the government’s fragility, weak institutional capacity, and limited fiscal space, as 
well as the expected reduction of concessional financing. Finally, policies could easily 
aggravate the country’s inequality if issues with existing market distortions and capture 
are not taken into account, and yet policies will likely encounter resistance from vested 
interests if such issues are considered. (The Chamber of Commerce and Industry at 
the federal and state levels encompasses influential members from the telecom sectors, 
import and export businesses, and financial sectors, among others, and provides 
collective bargaining power. The members contribute most of the domestic revenues 
collected by the federal and state authorities and as a result have strong influence 
and networks within the government that either facilitate or slow down government 
reforms.1) Regulatory and institutional reforms will thus be complicated and slow to 
implement. At the same time, it makes no sense to wait for these issues to be resolved 
in Somalia before taking steps for private sector development, as it is unlikely that the 
country’s reform momentum will take root unless short-term inclusive dividends can be 
generated for its growing population. In effect, previous experience with fragile states 
suggests that initiatives to develop the private sector need to begin early in the relief-to-
development continuum to avoid backsliding.2 
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST 
OF CPSD  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
6.
=== PAGE 128 ===
|  106  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recognizing the fragile context and structural constraints, the Somalia CPSD proposes 
three mutually reinforcing recommendations:
•	 Establish legitimate, effective, and equitable formal institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for private sector–led growth.
•	 Promote private participation and improve public stewardship of key enabling sectors 
to facilitate an economic transformation in the medium to long term.
•	 Improve growth and productivity of selected value chains for short- to medium-term 
dividends.
The three recommendations reinforce each other when implemented in parallel, 
and priority actions under each of the recommendations are presented in table 7.1. 
Importantly, in line with the country’s ongoing state-building agenda, several of the 
recommendations require cooperation among different levels of government—including 
at the FGS, FMS, and more local levels—for effective implementation (for example, in 
building consensus on key reforms and developing harmonized systems and standards).
Recommendation 1: Establish legitimate, effective, and equitable formal institutional 
and regulatory frameworks. Despite considerable advances in recent years, Somalia’s 
business environment remains very challenging, which has left private sector 
stakeholders dependent on informal trust-based institutions and has reproduced 
socioeconomic inequalities; thus, regulatory and institutional reforms should remain a 
priority (table 6.1). These reforms are essential to increase economic growth and firm 
productivity, and to enable effective public-private cooperation (for example, in service 
delivery). The reforms are also essential to enable an increase of efficiency-seeking FDI 
in the medium to long term. Unfortunately, in a fragile country with Somalia’s political 
economy, these reforms provoke considerable resistance from vested interests and as a 
result they are often unsuccessful.3 To avoid this, inclusive dialogue on economic issues 
in the country must be improved through the creation of business member organizations 
to facilitate the agglomeration and collective action of firms that have previously been 
marginalized from PPD,4 and a sustainable national PPD structure must be developed to 
improve stakeholder buy-in for reforms.5
Recommendation 2: Reform and promote private participation in key enabling sectors 
to facilitate an economic transformation in the medium to long term. A diversification 
to higher-value-added activities is critical for the generation of quality jobs in Somalia. 
However, this transformation is severely constrained by the subpar performance of 
enabling sectors discussed previously. Given the vast magnitude of challenges, this 
CPSD focuses on a subset of these issues and provides recommendations to address 
enabling sector shortfalls and gaps by better leveraging private sector arrangements. 
These arrangements have proven to be fruitful in other fragile countries with limited 
fiscal resources.6 However, a series of hurdles must be overcome for their successful 
implementation. Namely, apart from the lack of institutional and regulatory 
frameworks for private sector participation, the stewardship role of the Somali 
government could still be improved and investment incentives for private entities are 
weak. To improve these areas, the following actions must be prioritized: develop sector-
specific institutional and regulatory frameworks, address information gaps, and de-risk 
private investment in markets where incentives are weak (see table 6.2). In addition, the 
recommendations highlight the importance of completing these actions in an organized 
and coordinated manner that identifies national and regional economic corridors, 
along which anchor and ancillary investments can be made to enable priority economic 
activities and to maximize their multiplier effect.
=== PAGE 129 ===
|  107  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
TABLE 6.1 RECOMMENDATIONS TO ESTABLISH LEGITIMATE, EFFECTIVE, AND EQUITABLE FORMAL 
INSTITUTIONAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Improve public-private dialogue on economic and private sector development issues
Institutionalized 
national public-
private dialogue 
structure
•  Conduct a stakeholder mapping and a political economy assessment to identify 
the best PPD platform structure for Somalia.
•  Identify and gain the commitment of a group of well-respected champions 
for a national PPD process from the private sector (such as, owners of the 
largest conglomerates) and the public sector (such as, prime minister’s office or 
president’s office).
•  Continue to support sector-specific PPD processes through working groups on 
specific issues and sectors.
•  Support the development of an institutionalized and sustainable PPD structure (in 
conjunction with development partners) that will continuously enable a dialogue 
on national priorities and steps to achieve them. 
Short term
Short term
Short term
Medium term
Inclusive public-
private dialogue 
•  Use a group-based model to serve as an avenue for socialization of PPD to 
businesspeople from disadvantaged groups (such as, female entrepreneurs).a
•  Support the creation and capacity building of BMOs (for example, cooperatives) 
to include the interests of businesses of all sizes and sectors in policy dialogues.
•  Leverage community engagement mechanisms to include livelihood and informal 
need-based ventures in policy dialogues to ensure gender equity.
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Recommendation 3: Improve growth and productivity of selected value chains for short- 
to medium term dividends. Institutional and regulatory reforms and structural changes 
discussed previously take significant time to affect jobs creation and economic growth, 
especially in fragile countries like Somalia;7 and thus, alone, these reforms and changes 
will not be able to sustainably increase the generation of good quality jobs in the short 
term as Somalia needs. Value chain development plans have proven to be successful on 
this front,8 given their incremental, flexible, and bottom-up approach.9 These plans can 
improve short-term economic opportunities and reduce poverty incidence in Somalia, 
especially when targeting the value chains that conglomerates have failed to fully 
capture and in which productivity gains are possible (for example, livestock,10 crops, 
and fisheries). (See table 6.3.) This approach also reinforces the first and second pillars 
of recommendations when conducted in parallel, because value chain development (a) 
helps rebuild trust and social cohesion between value chain participants in the short to 
medium term, providing a basis for collective action against predation and rent seeking, 
as well as better local governance;11 and (b) improves the upstream supply chain of 
inputs, enabling the growth of higher-value-added activities in the medium to long term, 
especially if implemented using a cluster approach—focusing on areas that are on or 
near identified economic corridors.
a. 	
This has been implemented already in various FCV-affected countries in Africa. See, for instance, the Women’s Affinity 
Groups created by the World Bank’s Nigeria for Women Project.
=== PAGE 130 ===
|  108  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Develop institutional and regulatory frameworks for PSD
Business 
entry, exit, 
and corporate 
governance
•  Develop and implement a unified national business registration regime to enable 
a single unique business number across FGS and FMS and harmonize the online 
business registration and licensing system nationally. 
•  Develop a roadmap to create a one-stop shop for business licenses and permits 
(including sector-specific ones) and other postregistration procedures.
•  Assess the capacity-building needs of MoCI to better enforce laws and regulations 
and to support the institution in closing these gaps. 
•  	Adopt the business licensing law following consultations to harmonize processes 
and clarify mandates between FGS and regional governments.
•  Update the 2019 Company Act and develop regulations to establish a legal 
framework for the protection of minority shareholder rights and other aspects 
important to the Somali business community. 
Short term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Quality standards 
and trade
•  Conduct analyses of cross-border trade at international or FMS borders. 
•  Roll out a trade information portal to Somali regions outside of Banadir.
•  Streamline trade processes (for example, implement electronic cargo tracking 
systems and single window systems).
•  Assess the capacity-building needs of the Somalia Bureau of Standards (such 
as, for metrology, labs, testing, certification, accreditation) and support the 
institution in closing these gaps. 
•  Develop proper legislative instruments to create a technical regulation framework 
and a market surveillance system for quality standards.
•  	Create a national accreditation body.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Medium term
Investment policy 
and promotion
•  Publish a foreign investment negative list to increase transparency and provide 
legal certainty on applicable rules.
•  Abolish the country’s discriminatory screening process and any discretionary 
behavior by the government.
•  Take steps to ensure that the IPP regulatory framework guarantees the consistent 
implementation of laws and regulation for all types of investors.
•  Ensure that all incentives programs follow good international practices to 
maximize the effectiveness of FDI in the Somali economy.
•  Ratify international conventions that protect investors (such as the 1958 New 
York Convention) to improve Somalia’s dispute resolution framework.
•  Consider negotiating and signing bilateral investment agreements with main 
trade/investment partners.
•  Support SOMINVEST in developing its technical capacity, with a focus on (a) 
developing a local supplier database, (b) improving its matchmaking services 
capacity, and (c) implementing an investor aftercare program aimed toward 
Somali diaspora investors.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
=== PAGE 131 ===
|  109  | SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Property rights
•  Develop short-term solutions to resolve issues with land governance (for 
example, communal land leases, certificates of occupation/land use), including for 
groups with insecure tenure, such as women.
•  Carry out a detailed assessment of property rights and land tenure to determine 
urgent policy reforms on property rights and property registry.
Short term
Short term
Public-private 
partnerships
•  Enact the drafted PPP regulatory framework in line with best international 
practices.
•  Support the institutional setup for PPPs delineated in the aforementioned 
regulations, and provide capacity-building to established institutions.
Short term
Short to medium term
Tax and customs 
regime
•  Implement agreement on harmonization of tax identification numbers (TINs). 
•  Harmonize a national tariff schedule and ad valorem valuation database.
•  Implement the Integrated Tax Administration System and Customs 
Administration System, ensuring the harmonized TIN structure is included.
•  Clarify revenue assignments across federal structures.
•  Limit tax exemptions, ensure predictability in taxation rates, automate processes, 
and strengthen enforcement. 
•  Revise revenue regulations related to agreed harmonized taxes.
•  Harmonize domestic revenue legislation and implement harmonized tax rates as 
per the August 2023 FMFF agreement.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Medium term
ID system
•  Adopt implementing regulations for the ID law (for example, clarify the purpose of 
mandatory versus optional nature of the data provided at time of registration).
•  Provide capacity building to NIRA (for instance, develop an implementation 
strategy).
•  Ensure an adequate budget allocation for NIRA’s operations, including an increase 
in the size and capacity of its workforce, the implementation of a communication 
campaign to raise awareness about the new ID system, and the hiring of a 
temporary external workforce for the large-scale ID registration and delivery 
effort necessary when the ID system is established.
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Note: 	
Note: BMO = business member organization; FDI = foreign direct investment; FGS = Federal Government of Somalia; 
FMFF = Finance Ministers’ Fiscal Forum; FMS = federal member states; ID = identification; IPP = investment policy and 
promotion; MoCI = Ministry of Commerce and Industry; NIRA = National Identification and Registration Authority;  
PPD = public-private dialogue; PPP = public-private partnership; PSD = private sector development;  
SOMINVEST = Somalia Investment Promotion Office.
=== PAGE 132 ===
|  110  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
TABLE 6.2 RECOMMENDATIONS TO REFORM AND PROMOTE PRIVATE PARTICIPATION IN KEY  
ENABLING SECTORS TO FACILITATE AN ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION IN THE MEDIUM- TO  
LONG TERM
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Overall: Key enabling sectors
Improved 
coordination 
among 
government 
stakeholders in 
relevant enabling 
sectors
•  Develop an integrated national investment strategy that identifies anchor 
investments (such as, road corridors and ports), ancillary investments (for 
example, power and water), and spinoff investments (such as skills development 
and BDS) to enable priority economic activities along selected national and 
regional economic corridors.
•  	Develop an interactive geo-spatial platform that aggregates investment priorities 
of all relevant ministries to maximize synergies between investments of different 
kinds. 
Short term
Medium term
Infrastructure sectors
Reforms specific 
to transport and 
logistics
•  Operationalize government institutions for the transport sector (such as the 
Somali National Highway Authority and the Somali Ports Authority).
•  Prepare a prioritized list of projects ready for implementation that private sector 
entities can fund through various transactional structures (for example, PPPs).
•  	Conduct a market assessment of the Somali logistics sector.
•  	Perform a viability assessment for a greenfield airport in Mogadishu.
•  Perform an updated assessment of port utilization and performance.
•  	Explore feasible sustainable financing mechanisms for transport infrastructure 
development in Somalia.
•  Develop national transport policies, strategies, and plans (for example, a national 
transportation security strategy, a national transport master plan, or a state 
safety program).
•  	Establish a mechanism to constantly monitor the conditions of port management 
and exploitation, with a view toward improving operations of ports and (if 
necessary) revising conditions of concessions.
•  	Harmonize vehicle registration and driver licensing systems across FMS (including 
creating a unified database of vehicles and drivers).
•  	Provide catalytic funding for the development of dry storage and cold chain 
infrastructure in key areas where investment incentives are weak.
•  	Join the Single African Air Transport Market (SAATM) and implement associated 
commitments. 
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
=== PAGE 133 ===
|  111  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Reforms specific 
to digital 
connectivity
•  Implement interconnection regulations, and adopt frequency spectrum licensing 
fees that do not present a barrier for market entry.
•  	Finalize the draft interconnection policy to ban preferential treatment among 
operators related to interconnection and termination costs.
•  	Strengthen capacity for systematic sectoral data collection by the industry 
regulator (that is, the National Communications Authority) and improve 
understanding of demand side constraints for broadband adoption (ensuring data 
collection is gender disaggregated).
•  	Enact the drafted National Communications Authority Competition Regulation.
•  Draft and enact laws to enable and promote trust in digital transactions and 
services (for example, e-transactions, data protection and privacy, cybersecurity 
and cybercrime, electronic documents and e-signature, and data sharing and 
information access).
•  	Develop a new national and subnational ICT Policy and Strategy (2024–2029).
•  	Provide catalytic funding to unlock infrastructure deployment in unserved or 
underserved areas (such as, Wi-Fi hotspots in borderlands and in IDP/refugee 
camps).
•  	Enhance regulatory and institutional frameworks on infrastructure sharing, 
mobile roaming, quality of service, spectrum management, consumer protection, 
numbering, cybersecurity, and data management.
•  	Incentivize the establishment of a carrier neutral internet exchange point.
•  	Support digital skills programs for MSMEs and individuals, and support the 
integration of digital skills modules in livelihoods programs targeting low-income 
groups (including women).
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Reforms specific 
to access to 
water
•  Capacity building of water government institutions on the management of 
multi-use water points and the institutionalization of water sharing agreements 
to ensure inclusivity of access to water points.
•  Conduct a water security diagnostic and a market assessment of the water 
delivery sector for all major cities and towns in Somalia.
•  Conduct an upstream investment analysis of town water supplies in all major 
cities and towns in Somalia.
•  	Define an urban water service delivery model.
•  	Review the current water law and provide a policy note to guide reforms to 
reflect Somalia’s federal system.
Short term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
=== PAGE 134 ===
|  112  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Reforms specific 
to access to 
energy 
•  Appropriately staff the National Electricity Authority.
•  	Draft and enact missing secondary legislation (for example, zoning regulation, 
renewable energy regulation), codes, and standards, and implement existing 
secondary legislation (that is, tariff regulation, licensing regulation) with a view 
toward operationalizing the Electricity Act.
•  	Prepare a National Least-Cost Development Plan (for generation, transmission, 
and distribution), and an Electricity Access Strategy to inform public and private 
sector investments.
•  	Continue to provide technical assistance to the Somali government (for instance, 
SoBS) for the adoption and implementation of Lighting Global and International 
Electrotechnical Commission quality standards for off-grid solar PV products.
•  	Provide support to off-grid energy services providers interested in adopting PayGo 
systems in the exploration of partnerships and development of options that will 
lead to the establishment of PayGo businesses.
•  	Undertake detailed feasibility studies for renewable energy projects (for example, 
site-specific wind resource measurement, renewable mini-grid prefeasibility 
study) to incentivize private sector investment.
•  	Provide technical support (such as, network and equipment standardization, 
losses reduction, appropriate metering) to ESPs to assist them in becoming more 
investment ready.
•  	Provide catalytic funding for the development of hybrid mini-grids in geographical 
areas where investment incentives are currently weak.
•  Conduct regular sampling of energy utilization via a limited energy census.
•  Harmonize regulatory and institutional frameworks between FGS and regional 
governments.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Education and skills
Increase the 
stewardship role 
of the Somali 
government in 
education
•  Develop regulatory and policy frameworks on teacher standards and 
management and the regulation of nonstate providers.
•  Support capacity building of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher 
Education to strengthen its capacity for sector stewardship (including in 
curriculum design, assessment of schools).
•  	Develop a national system for recurrent student learning assessments and 
teacher proficiency tests, and create comprehensive teacher training programs. 
•  	Establish a comprehensive, standardized framework that harmonizes curricula, 
examinations, and certifications across all TVETs.
•  	Implement robust data collection mechanisms to foster a thriving TVET sector 
that meets the evolving needs of industries and students.
•  	Incentivize private sector collaboration with TVET programs (such as, outcome 
funds for apprenticeship programs).
•  Incentivize training of female teachers.
Short term
Short term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
=== PAGE 135 ===
|  113  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Incentivize 
expansion of 
schooling for the 
disadvantaged
•  Link conditional cash transfers or cash vouchers to families with the enrollment of 
disadvantaged students (for example, girls, the poor) in school.
•  	Provide nonstate schools with subsidies per student to incentivize enrollment of 
disadvantaged students (for example, girls, the poor). 
•  	Develop PPPs to enable the establishment of schools in partnership with local 
communities in areas that do not have any education providers.
•  	Explore catalytic financing arrangements (such as outcome-based finance) to 
improve education outcomes in the country.
Short term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Increase supply 
of programs to 
develop skills 
for life and labor 
market success
•  Provide small grants to fund skills development services for youth and women (for 
example, technical, entrepreneurial, and life skills) imparted by existing local and 
international nongovernmental organizations, public and private TVET centers, 
and private firms. 
•  	Invest in the development of programs for second-chance education and skills 
development (including digital and financial literacy programs).
•  	Support the development of the Somali TVET system and incentivize increased 
employer participation in the design of curriculum review committees.
Short term
Medium term
Medium term
Decrease labor 
market frictions
•  Develop job matching systems to improve the formal links to the job market.
•  	Engage the broader community in targeted community-based interventions 
to shift social norms, including those that limit occupations that women can 
participate in.
Short term
Medium term
Access to business services
Improve capacity 
and effectiveness 
of business 
service providers 
•  Develop a pay-for-success initiative to incentivize competitively selected business 
service providers to strengthen their operational efficiency and quality when 
delivering expertise to targeted firms.
Short to medium term
Financial sector
Improve enabling 
environment 
and system 
confidence 
through the 
development of 
a strong legal 
and regulatory 
framework
•  Upgrade legal and regulatory framework by finalizing and enacting the Financial 
Institutions Law, National Payment Systems Law, and Insurance Law.
•  Amend central bank and AML/CFT acts to better align with international 
standards.
•  Enhance prudential regulation to strengthen financial system oversight (especially 
for mobile money, nonbank financial institutions, and consumer protection).
•  Strengthen the national framework for Islamic banking by leveraging knowledge 
from global experience.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Medium term
=== PAGE 136 ===
|  114  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
Note: 	
AML/CFT = anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of terrorism; BDS = business development services; CBS = 
Central Bank of Somalia; ESPs = energy service providers; FGS = Federal Government of Somalia; FMS = federal member 
states; FRC = Financial Reporting Center; ICT = information and communication technology; ID = identification; KYC = 
know your customer; MENAFATF = Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force; MSMEs = micro, small, and 
medium enterprises; PPPs = public-private partnerships; PV = photovoltaic; SoBS = Somalia Bureau of Standards; TVET = 
technical and vocational education and training.
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Boost financial 
sector soundness 
by building 
the capacity 
of financial 
institutions 
•  Support development of standardized training for banks and nonbanks, and 
strengthen their capacity to mitigate risk perceptions and to develop a diverse 
offering of shariah-compliant products and services. 
•  Develop platforms to strengthen coordination between different regulatory 
bodies and policy institutions, and promote public-private dialogue and stronger 
engagement between stakeholders (including through strengthening related 
industry associations).
•  Strengthen the capacity of financial oversight institutions (CBS, FRC) to more 
effectively supervise and support financial system development.
•  Capitalize CBS to allow it to deliver its mandate effectively.
•  	Extend the use of country systems to federal member states. 
Short term
Short term
Short to medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Strengthen 
financial 
infrastructure 
to reinforce 
financial system 
foundation
•  Operationalize the Somalia Payment Switch.
•  	Continue to upgrade the payment system. 
•  	Operationalize the national ID system (for example, digital customer verification 
system/eKYC protocols, enhanced customer due diligence, etc.). 
•  	Develop a national collateral registry. 
•  Develop a credit information sharing system. 
Short term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Promote financial 
inclusion 
to expand 
opportunities 
for economic 
empowerment
•  	Develop programs to improve financial literacy and strengthen consumer 
protection. Pilot financial awareness and customer outreach programs with 
gender-differentiated messaging strategies.
•  	Develop a national financial inclusion strategy (including exploring opportunities 
for developing digital financial services and defined sex-disaggregated targets for 
reaching underserved market segments).
•  Promote the collection of sex-disaggregated data on customer base, product 
portfolio, and staffing of the financial sector; and calculate market opportunity for 
bridging existing gaps in gender financial inclusion and credit access.
•  	Incentivize lending to unserved and underserved segments and de-risk 
engagement in priority but high-risk areas (for example, through risk sharing 
mechanisms, public credit guarantees, etc.).
Short term
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Integrate Somalia 
in the global 
financial system 
by strengthening 
financial integrity
•  	Implement recommendations from the National Risk Assessment.
•  	Facilitate the development of correspondent banking relationships and related 
capacity development at banks. 
•  	Leverage MENAFATF mutual evaluations (planned for July 2024) to enhance AML/
CFT capacity at financial institutions.
Short term
Short to medium term
Medium term
=== PAGE 137 ===
|  115  | 
SOMALIA COUNTRY PRIVATE SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC
TABLE 6.3 RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE GROWTH AND PRODUCTIVITY OF SELECTED VALUE 
CHAINS FOR SHORT- TO MEDIUM TERM DIVIDENDS
Area of focus
Recommendation
Time frame
Support analytics 
to improve 
availability of 
data on selected 
sectors
•  Compile and harmonize insights from existing analyses of the livestock, 
agriculture, and fisheries sectors to reveal existing data gaps and to understand 
if any additional analytical studies are necessary to select value chains (ensuring 
gender disaggregation of data wherever possible).
•  Conduct demand and supply assessments of enterprises in selected value chains, 
and perform a mapping of firms’ capacities and location using a cluster approach 
(focusing on areas in or near identified economic corridors).
•  	Conduct an assessment of quality testing needs for selected value chains.
Short term
Short term
Short term
Enhance 
productivity
•  Support the development of extension services and the transfer of technology in 
selected value chains.
•  Support technical assistance and BDS for established MSMEs and upskilling of 
livelihood and need-based ventures in selected value chains. 
•  	Support the integration of small-scale and emerging firms into value chains 
by improving their capacity to finance and execute productivity-enhancing 
investments and to respond to the requirements of end markets and buyers 
(off-takers).
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Develop 
economic links 
•  	Develop a database with mapped enterprises in targeted value chains. 
•  	Actively “match” organized and creditworthy anchor enterprises (off-takers) with 
aggregated groups of producers. 
•  Aggregate producers in select value chains to improve market access.
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
Improve value 
chain–specific 
access to finance 
•  	Develop credit plans for micro formal and micro informal private sector ventures 
(including self-employment ventures) in selected value chains.
•  Develop facilities to de-risk investments (for example, from the Somali diaspora) 
in selected value chains.
•  Develop risk-mitigation products (for example, takaful insurance products) to 
increase the resilience of private sector entities in selected value chains.
•  Create financial literacy and capacity-building programs for firms in selected 
value chains.
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Short to medium term
Strengthen value 
chain–specific 
institutional 
and regulatory 
frameworks
•  	Provide technical assistance and capacity building of key organizations overseeing 
selected value chains (for example, sector-specific quality monitoring and trade 
facilitation).
•  Assess the regulatory frameworks in selected value chains (for example, 
diagnostics of current procedures, sector-specific fiscal regulations, and 
investment incentives, among others), and implement reforms necessary to 
strengthen those frameworks.
•  	Develop cluster development plans and public-private sector stakeholder 
platforms for selected value chains.
Medium term
Medium term
Medium term
=== PAGE 138 ===
|  116  |
	
COMPREHENSIVE LIST OF CPSD RECOMMENDATIONS 
Notes
1.	
Information on the Somalia Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s structures and relationships, and how they support or 
oppose government-initiated reforms is scarce. However, in 2021, the federal government tried to change the leadership 
of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry owing to alleged accusations that it was infiltrated by al-Shabaab, and that al-
Shabaab was profiting from illegal taxation of business organizations. See Abdulkadir Khalif, “Somalia Government Rescinds 
Decision to Disband Chamber of Commerce,” the East African, January 15, 2021, https://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/tea/
business/somalia-chamber-of-commerce-3258094.
2.	
Nora Dudwick and Radhika Srinivasan, Creating Jobs in Africa’s Fragile States—Are Value Chains an Answer? (Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2013); DECD (Donor Committee for Enterprise Development), “Business Environment Reforms in Fragile and 
Conflict-Affected Situations” (Discussion paper, DECD, Cambridge, UK, October 2020); G-20, “The G-20 Compact with Africa: 
A Joint AFDB, IMF, and WBG Report”—G-7, “Briefing Note 3: The Private Sector in Conflict-Affected States,” 1. 
3.	
Scott Kleinberg, “Business-Enabling Environment and the Value Chain” (Briefing paper, US Agency for International 
Development, Washington, DC, 2008); Canan Gündüz and Diana Klein, “Conflict-Sensitive Approaches to Value Chain 
Development” (microREPORT 101, USAID, Washington, DC, 2008).
4.	
For information on the fact that business associations are best placed to take collective action in the business sector in civil 
society, see Shantayanan Devarajan, Stuti Khemani, and Michael Walton, “Civil Society, Public Action, and Accountability in 
Africa” (Policy Research Working Paper 5733, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2011).
5.	
Andreja Marusic et al., “Trust between Public and Private Sectors: The Path to Better Regulatory Compliance?” (World Bank, 
Washington, DC, September 2020); World Bank, Public-Private Dialogue in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations (Washington, 
DC: World Bank, June 2014).
6.	
See, for instance, Naoise Mac Sweeney, “Private Sector Development in Post-Conflict Countries” (Donor Committee 
for Enterprise Development, Cambridge, UK, 2009), https://www.enterprise-development.org/wp-content/uploads/
PostConflict_PSD_EN.pdf.
7.	
Lant Pritchett and Frauke de Weijer, “Fragile States: Stuck in a Capability Trap?” (World Development Report background 
paper, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2001). 
8.	
Mac Sweeney, “Private Sector Development in Post-Conflict Countries.”
9.	
For more information, see Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global 
Poverty (New York: Random House, 2011).
10. 	
In this regard, FGS launched the De-Risking, Inclusion and Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies in the Horn of Africa 
Project (DRIVE) in late August 2022, with World Bank support. Besides enhancing resilience in one of the few value chains 
that conglomerates have failed to capture, the project aims to (a) provide financial services for pastoralists (for example, 
drought insurance, savings, and digital accounts); (b) link pastoralists to markets, exporters, and processors so they can sell 
quality animals through a Livestock Value Chain Facility; (c) strengthen sector-specific regulatory frameworks; (d) de-risk 
and mobilize private investment in livestock value chains; and (e) improve quality assurance standards in the sector, among 
others.
11.	
Nora Dudwick and Radhika Srinivasan, “Creating Jobs in Africa’s Fragile States: Are Value Chains an Answer?” (World Bank, 
Washington, DC, 2013).
=== PAGE 139 ===
THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street NW,  
Washington, DC 20433 U.S.A.
worldbank.org
IFC
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A.
ifc.org
CONTACTS
Asta Bareisaite
abareisaite@worldbank.org
Juan Andrés Cartwright
jcartwrightramon@worldbank.org
Mounir Bari
mbari1@ifc.org
