=== PAGE 1 ===
Hawassa Industrial Park
Community Impact Evaluation
ETHIOPIA
Context
Ethiopia is a low-income country with ambitious plans to become 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s leader in light manufacturing. The Government 
of Ethiopia has embarked on an industrialization strategy based on 
the creation of special economic zones as centers of export-oriented 
light manufacturing. The flagship industrial park of this strategy 
is located in Hawassa, a city with around 300,000 inhabitants in 
southern Ethiopia. At full capacity, the Hawassa Industrial Park (HIP) 
will provide employment to 60,000 workers, most of whom will be 
women aged 18 to 35 coming from outside Hawassa, from the wider 
Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region (SNNPR).
Relatively little is known about the impact of such industrial employment 
on the economic, physical, and social well-being of workers and the 
largely rural, agricultural communities from which they are recruited. This 
evaluation seeks to shed light on these impacts. To do so, it aims to use 
the expansion of hiring for the park through a centralized, government-
led system that integrates recruitment, registration, grading, and soft 
training of future workers — the Hawassa Industrial Park Sourcing and 
Training Employees in the Region (HIPSTER) scheme. The HIPSTER is 
an intervention facilitated by Enterprise Partners, a social enterprise 
facilitating market development, and funded by UK aid.
Hawassa Industrial Park
The Hawassa Industrial Park, which 
opened in July 2016, has been described 
as 
the 
Ethiopian 
government’s 
“flagship” industrial park. It is anchored 
by global textile firm PVH (formerly 
Phillips Van Heusen), but 18 other 
firms have invested as well. Production 
started at relatively small scale late 
2016, with the first exports mid-2017. 
By early 2019, about 25,000 workers 
were hired across the 52 factory sheds 
of the park. At full capacity, the park is 
expected to employ 60,000 workers, 
working on a double shift. PVH alone 
expects to export $100m worth of 
clothing per year from Hawassa. In 
total, the government projects that the 
park could generate about $1 billion of 
exports per year.
What is the impact of factory employment on workers and the rural 
communities from which they originate?
GURAGE
SILTI
GAMO
 GOFA
O R O M I A
S . N . N . P .
O R O M I A
Abaya
Lake
Awasa
Lake
Ch'amo
Lake
Ziway
Lake
Shala
Lake
Shashamane
Sodo
Arba
Minch
Dilla
Tore
Ziway
Bule Hora
Jimma
Denboya
Gerba
Hawassa
Industrial 
Park
Shashamane
Sodo
Arba
Minch
Dilla
Hawassa
Industrial 
Park
Tore
Ziway
Bule Hora
Jimma
Denboya
Gerba
Abaya
Lake
Awasa
Lake
Ch'amo
Lake
Ziway
Lake
Shala
Lake
O R O M I A
O R O M I A
GURAGE
SILTI
GAMO
 GOFA
PROJECT ZONES
REGION BOUNDARIES
ZONE BOUNDARIES
MAIN ROADS
CITIES AND TOWNS
S . N . N . P .
0
30
60 Kilometers
IBRD 44202  |  FEBRUARY 2019
Source:  OpenStreetMap contributors
S O M A L I
HARARI
ADDIS
ABABA
ADDIS
ABABA
SOMALIA
ERITREA
REPUBLIC OF
YEMEN
SOUTH
 SUDAN
UGANDA
DJIBOUTI
SUDAN
KENYA
Area
of Detail
=== PAGE 2 ===
The ieConnect for Impact program links project teams with researchers to develop rigorous and 
innovative impact evaluations that both substantially improve the evidence-base for policy making 
and induce global shifts in transport policy. The ieConnect program is a collaboration between the 
World Bank’s Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) group in the Development Research Group 
and the Transport Global Practice (TR GP). This program is part of the Impact Evaluation to Development 
Impact (i2i) multi-donor trust fund and is funded with UK aid from the UK government (DFID) and by 
the European Union (EU).
Impact Evaluation Research
This impact evaluation (IE) seeks to study the impact of employment 
at the Hawassa Industrial Park on the economic, physical, and social 
well-being of workers, and the broader impact on the largely rural, 
agricultural communities from which these workers are recruited. 
More generally, the evaluation will shed light on the implications of 
large-scale, location-specific development projects on individuals 
and local communities.
Methodologically, this IE uses a cluster-randomized control trial. 
Communities (clusters) are randomly assigned to an already-
planned expansion of recruitment for the Hawassa Industrial 
Park. In “treated” communities, randomly selected eligble job 
seekers will be offered relocation allowance to Hawassa to begin 
work in the industrial park. In each of our study communities, we 
will collect detailed primary survey data to complement existing 
administrative data. 
Data collection will include baseline, midline (after 1 year), and 
endline (after 2–3 years) household surveys, key informant 
interviews, and community surveys to measure community-level 
outcomes. In addition to surveying households that are eligible 
for the recruitment program, we will collect representative data 
from randomly-selected households in each study community. 
The team will collect detailed data on welfare outcomes that 
are harmonized with the World Bank-supported Ethiopia Living 
Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS). In addition to these 
standard measures, the team will gather rich data on intrahousehold 
dynamics, gender norms, fertility, as well as cortisol levels, a range 
of anthropometric measures, and mental health outcomes.
Using a pre-registered research design, our design allows us to 
estimate impacts at three levels of analysis. We will compare 
individual-level outcomes of treated job seekers to job seekers in 
control communities. We will additionally compare both household-
level and individual-level household member outcomes of treated 
households to households in control communities. For individual-
level and household-level outcomes, we will also be able to 
estimate spillover effects by comparing outcomes for non-treated 
individuals and households in treated communities with those in 
non-treated communities. Finally, we will compare community-
level outcomes between those which receive this intensified 
recruitment to those that did not.
Policy Relevance
The Hawassa Industrial Park is a cornerstone of the Government 
of Ethiopia’s ambitious industrialization strategy. It is seen by 
the government as a blueprint for further parks in the country, 
and it represents the first large-scale investment by “high quality” 
garmenting firms that perceive Ethiopia as a frontier destination 
for their production facilities. Accordingly, the project has high 
political visibility in Ethiopia. Beyond its role as a flagship investment 
destination, the park represents a significant shock to the local 
economy of Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region 
(SNNPR), and to the national economy of Ethiopia.
This project has a range of implications for productivity, structural 
transformation, welfare, health, education and social norms. It is 
representative of a broader class of spatial development programs 
such as growth poles, growth corridors, and special economic zones 
(SEZs) that have been used by World Bank client governments 
and development partners as a tool to promote private-sector 
development. Fully quantifying the impacts of such programs is 
often challenging because generating counterfactual scenarios for 
such place-specific investments is complex, and a full estimation 
of impact also requires an understanding of general equilibrium 
effects in various markets at the same time. The research team 
hopes to make a step towards this understanding and thus inform 
wider development policy.
For more information email dimetransport@worldbank.org or visit 
www.worldbank.org/en/research/dime/brief/transport
