=== PAGE 1 ===
PRESENTED BY :
PROF DONALD OGWENO Ph.D
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF
SOMALIA 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND
CLIMATE CHANGE
=== PAGE 2 ===
Table Of Contents
Acronyms
1. Introduction
2. Somalia's National Circumstances
2.1 SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS
2.2 SOMALIA'S CLIMATE RISKS AND VULNERABILITY
2.3 SOMALIA'S GHG EMISSION PROFILE
2.4 CLIMATE-RELATED SECURITY RISKS
3. Somalia's Policy Framework For Climate Change
4. Adaptation (Article 7)
12
4.1 AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND FOOD SECURITY
12
4.2. WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
13
4.3 PUBLIC HEALTH RESILIENCE
15
4.4 INFRASTRUCTURE AND URBAN RESILIENCE
15
4.5 JUST TRANSITION
16
4.6 OTHER PRIORITIES
16
5. Mitigation Pathways (Article 4)
17
5.1 AGRICULTURE
18
5.2 THE LAND USE, LAND USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY (LULUCF) SECTOR
19
5.3 ENERGY SECTOR
20
5.4 TRANSPORTATION SECTOR
21
5.5 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
21
5.6 INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE (Ippu) SECTOR
22
5.7 ADVANCING COOLING SOLUTIONS IN NDC 3.0
22
6. Financing Adaptation And Mitigation Priorities (2025-2035)
25
6.1 FEASIBILITY OF SOMALIA'S NDC 3.0 MITIGATION TARGET BY 2035
25
7. Capacity Building, Technology Development, And Transfer For Somalia's Ndc
7.1 CAPACITY BUILDING
7.2 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER
7.3 IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
7.4 MONITORING AND EVALUATION
8. Climate Justice And Security
8.1 GENDER, YOUTH AND OTHER VULNERABLE GROUPS INCLUSION IN CLIMATE ACTIONS
27
27
28
29
29
30
30
8.2 CLIMATE JUSTICE
32
8.3 Loss AND DAMAGE
32
8.4 CLIMATE, CONFLICT SENSITIVITY AND PEACEBUILDING
33
8.5 DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
34
8.6 PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT
34
9. Means Of Implementation
36
10. Monitoring Reporting And Verification (Mrv)
38
Annex 1: Information To Facilitate Clarity, Transparency And Understanding (Ictu)
39
=== PAGE 3 ===
ACRONYMS
01
AAI
Africa Adaptation Initiative
AFOLU
Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use
AFR100
African Forest and Landscape Restoration Initiative
AIMS
Aid Information Management System
BUR
Biennial Update Report
CAHOSCC
Committee of African Heads of State and Government on Climate Change
COP
Conference of the Parties
DAE
Direct Access Entities
GBV
Gender-Based Violence
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GEF
Global Environment Facility
GCF
Green Climate Fund
GNI
Gross National Income
GWL
Global Warming Level
HFCs
Hydrofluorocarbons
ICTU
Information to facilitate clarity, transparency and understanding
IDPs
Internally displaced persons
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPPU
Industrial Processes and Product Use
INDC
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
LDC
Least Developed Country
MoECC
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
MRV
Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification
NDP-9
Ninth National Development Plan (2020–2024)
ND-GAIN
Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative Index
NTP
National Transformation Plan (2025–2029)
TNA
Technology needs assessment
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
=== PAGE 4 ===
INTRODUCTION
Somalia submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in 2015, in accordance with
decisions 1/CP.19 and 1/CP.20 of the UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change). After ratifying the Paris Agreement in April 2016, the INDC became Somalia's first NDC.
According to decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 24, which requests Parties to communicate or update their
NDC by 2020, Somalia reviewed and updated its NDC for submission to the UNFCCC Secretariat in
2021 (NDC 2.0). The updated NDC provides measurable and budgeted mitigation and adaptation
actions in agriculture, energy, land use and forestry, transport, and waste sectors. However, it is yet to
be submitted to the UNFCCC.
In conformity with the Paris Agreement Article 4.9 which requires parties to submit updated NDC every
5 years, the MoECC, in collaboration with internal and external partners embarked on a collective
process to review the existing NDC with the aim of ratcheting climate change ambitions; aligning it with
Somalia’s LT-LEDs, the key national development planning frameworks such as the "Acceleration and
Localization of Environmentally Sustainable Development Goals (Green SDGs) for Somalia"; and to
develop an investable NDC implementation roadmap, with detailed sectoral strategies, including
resource allocation. The review and update of the NDC was a participatory process involving
stakeholders from society and government approach which included all government departments and
agencies, civic society, humanitarian organizations, communities and special interest groups such as
gender, youth, persons with disabilities (PWD), and indigenous groups.
This NDC considers resolutions from the recent Conference of the Parties (COP) meetings, such as
the Katowicze Climate Package (2018), which established rules for implementing the Paris Agreement,
influencing NDC development and reporting. COP26 in Glasgow (2021) underscored the need for
more ambitious emission reduction targets aligned with limiting global warming to below 2°C, the
announcement of 2050 net-zero targets by many countries, and the emphasis on adaptation and
resilience in NDCs. The review aims to accomplish several key objectives, including developing an
NDC Implementation Plan for priority actions in key sub-sectors; identifying the enabling environment
and barriers to effective implementation of climate actions; and assessing and mapping potential
financial resources to support NDC actions. In conformity with the reporting requirements therein,
Somalia submitted its first Biennial Update Report (BUR) in 2024.
This NDC 3.0 constitutes a progression in ambition from the previous NDC which aimed to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent below 2015 levels by 2030.  The realisation of this target has
been constrained by social and economic instability, and low partner support for the proposed
conditional actions.  The NDC 3.0 is informed by the outcomes of the first Somalia GHG emission
inventory of 2025 and the Global Stocktake in 2023, and represents Somalia’s highest possible
ambition in light of its national social, political and economic circumstances and capability. Somalia
relies economically on agriculture and natural resources; has a high dependence on electricity
generation using fossil fuels; low installed renewable energy capacity (12%) and dominance of
microgrids; low industrial capacity; and a nascent political stability and public sector.  These realities
shape Somalia’s national circumstances and emissions profiles, and the NDC targets have been
established consequent to this. 
This NDC aligns with long-term carbon-neutral development strategies, which will leverage major
technological advances and mobilize climate finance and investment for future economic growth and
development.  It also aligns with the country's national development strategies and Sustainable 
02
=== PAGE 5 ===
03
Development Goals (SDGs), such as SDG 13 (Climate Action), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy),
and SDG 15 (Life on Land), SDG 5 (Gender) along with other goals that foster sustainable
development. As a low GHG-emitting country (contributing 0.019% of global emissions), while being
highly vulnerable to climate change, Somalia prioritises NDCs adaptation and resilience actions.
Therefore, domestic funds will be prioritised for adaptation over mitigation measures. Importantly,
gender issues will be prioritised to reduce vulnerability of marginalised sections of the community to
climate shocks. Furthermore, integrated approaches will be pursued that align climate action,
peacebuilding, and security strategies as called for by the National Transformation Plan (2025–2029).
=== PAGE 6 ===
2. SOMALIA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES
04
2.1 Socio-Economic Status 
Somalia is considered a Least Developed Country (LDC), with low GNI per Capita (USD 573), Human
Assets Index (31.8 driven by high under 5 infant mortality - 106 per 1000 births), and low adult literacy
(41%) . About 55% of Somalia’s 19.6 million people live in rural areas, while there are 2.6 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs) across the country. The GDP of Somalia is estimated at 10.97
billion USD, and the country has a low Economic Vulnerability Index (54.4%). This reflects the fact that
65% of Somalia’s population depend on traditional subsistence farming with livestock and crops, which
contributes 75 percent to the GDP and accounts for 93 percent of the nation's total exports. This
significant export figure is due to a robust livestock trade, with Somalia having one of the largest
livestock populations in Africa (over 50 million heads). 
The socio-political history of post-independence
Somalia has been characterized by continuing
conflict, which culminated in the collapse of the
federal government in 1991. Consequently,
Somalia is ranked among the least developed
countries in the world, with a significant majority
of the population (67%) living in poverty.
Climate change and conflict in Somalia have an
intricate relationship, although direct causation
is yet to be fully established. Climate change
worsens existing environmental stresses, such
as drought and resource scarcity, which
contribute 
to 
socioeconomic 
vulnerabilities
(Figure 1). This intensifies competition for
resources, resulting in heightened tensions and
conflict 
among 
communities. 
Furthermore,
extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab persist in
destabilizing regions, particularly in southern
Somalia, weakening governance, eroding public
trust, and disrupting essential services. These
have 
resulted 
in 
displacement, 
livelihood
disruptions, and damage to critical infrastructure
causing financial loss, food insecurity, and
restricted access to vital services. 
1
1  United Nations Department of Economic Affairs. http://www.un.org/DESA
=== PAGE 7 ===
Additionally, the harsh and changing climate has led to mass displacement within Somalia, causing
traditional livelihoods based on agriculture and pastoralism to become unviable for many. 
Somalia experiences some of the highest levels of gender inequality globally, with a Gender Inequality
Index of 0.776, ranking fourth in the world (UNDP, 2012). This extreme disparity is also reflected in high
rates of gender-based violence (GBV), female genital mutilation, child marriage, very low female
literacy rates at just 28%. Women remain largely excluded from political and decision-making spaces,
holding only 20% of parliamentary seats. This underrepresentation has significant implications: without
women’s voices and perspectives in governance, policies fail to reflect their specific needs and
priorities, particularly in sectors like climate adaptation and resilience-building.
Gender inequality deeply intersects with climate-related risks in Somalia. Women’s lack of participation
in climate-related institutions and their underrepresentation in the green job market severely limit their
ability to influence or benefit from climate action. This is further compounded by limited access to
education and professional training opportunities in the climate and environmental fields. As climate
shocks such as droughts, floods, and resource scarcity continue to intensify in Somalia, they
disproportionately affect women and girls, who are often the primary providers of food, water, and care
within households but have the least access to resources, services, and decision-making power.
Further, security and climate-induced displacement further exposes women and girls to heightened
risks of gender-based violence, exploitation, and loss of livelihoods. In overcrowded displacement sites
and urban areas, access to essential services—including reproductive health care, protection services,
and livelihood opportunities—becomes severely constrained, escalating human security risks . 
Young Somalis are disproportionately affected by climate change, its direct impacts on livelihood
opportunities, peace, security, health, and the ripple effects on almost every aspect of sustainable
development. According to the Population Survey conducted in 2014, approximately 81.5% of Somalis
are under the age of 35 , placing Somalia among the five most youthful countries in the world. Despite
the significant impacts of the climate crisis on youth and their future, they have so far been excluded
from the planning and implementation of climate change discourses at the global, national, and local
levels. Despite the significant impacts of the climate crisis on youth and their future, they have so far
been excluded from the planning and implementation of climate change discourses at the global,
national, and local levels. Thus, gender inequality and inclusion of youth, persons with disabilities and
other vulnerable groups are critically important in Somalia, and any intervention that does not address
these issues will not lead to just and equitable development for all, hence the importance of factoring it
in this NDC.
2 Gender, Climate and Conflict Analysis in Somalia (WEB).pdf
3 https://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Population-Estimation-Survey-of-Somalia-PESS-2013-2014.pdf
05
2
3
=== PAGE 8 ===
2.2 Somalia’s Climate Risks and Vulnerability 
06
Somalia remains one of the most climate-
vulnerable countries in the world, as
evidenced by its ranking of 164th out of
187  countries on the 2022 Notre Dame
Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN)
Index (Figure 2). With an overall score of
37.4, Somalia's position underscores the
compounded risks it faces from climate
change, driven by both acute vulnerability
and a limited capacity to respond through
adaptation mechanisms.
The 
ND-GAIN 
Index 
evaluates 
two
principal dimensions: vulnerability and
readiness.
Somalia's vulnerability score of 0.606 (on
a scale from 0 to 1, where higher values
denote 
greater 
vulnerability) 
reflects
systemic exposure to climate hazards
such as droughts, floods, and rising
temperatures. These hazards have direct
consequences for the country's food
security, water resources, health systems,
and 
ecosystem 
services 
(Figure 
3).
Somalia’s prolonged conflict and political
fragility further exacerbate these stressors
by weakening institutional capacities and
reducing access to essential infrastructure
and services.
4  2022 ND-GAIN Country Index Rankings
4
=== PAGE 9 ===
Sector 
Vulnerability Score 
Agriculture 
0.678
Water 
0.512
Health 
0.841
Ecosystem Services
0.65
Human Habitat 
0.672
2.3 Somalia’s GHG Emission profile
07
Equally concerning is Somalia’s low readiness score of 0.355, which signals a weak enabling
environment for climate adaptation. This score reflects insufficient governance structures, limited
economic capacity, and underdeveloped social systems, all of which constrain the country’s ability to
attract and deploy climate investments effectively. The combination of high vulnerability and low
readiness places Somalia in the upper-left quadrant of the ND-GAIN Matrix, representing countries that
are not only at great risk from climate change but are also least prepared to manage these risks.
The historical trend in ND-GAIN rankings
further emphasizes Somalia’s precarious
position (Figure 2). Although modest gains
were observed in the mid-2010s, the overall
trend reveals a persistent lag in adaptive
capacity. As global climate impacts intensify,
Somalia’s 
development 
trajectory 
and
humanitarian outlook will increasingly be
defined by its ability or inability to improve
climate 
resilience 
through 
targeted
investments, 
institutional 
reform, 
and
international support. 
The scope of Somalia’s 2025 GHG emission
inventory covered emission sources outlined in
the IPCC 2006 Reporting Guidelines, including
emissions from energy, waste, Agriculture,
Forestry, and Other Land Use (AFOLU), and
Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU)
sectors. The assessment considered four (4)
primary greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide
(CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),
and Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).
Figure 4 shows Somalia’s greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions trajectory from 2016 to 2035. The
current GHG emission level stands at 54.3
MtCO₂e in 2024 and will rise to 84.9 MtCO₂e by
2035 under a business-as-usual scenario. On a
per capita basis, the current emission level is at 2.6
tonnes per person per year, rising to 3.2 tonnes
per person per year in 2035. The rise in emissions
is primarily driven by the AFOLU sector, reflecting
intensifying 
land-use 
pressures 
such 
as
deforestation, land degradation, and increased
agricultural activity. The agriculture and Land Use,
Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sectors
will remain the dominant contributors throughout
this period, accounting for 46% and 40% of total
emissions, respectively (Figure 5).  
Table 1: ND-GAIN by Sector (Somalia)
=== PAGE 10 ===
08
In terms of the constitution of emissions, Methane is the largest contributor, accounting for 49% of total
emissions, followed by CO₂ at 48%, while N₂O and HFCs/PFCs together make up the remaining 3%
(Figure 6). The primary drivers of GHG emissions are agriculture and land-use change, particularly CH₄
from livestock, and CO₂ from deforestation, vegetation firing, and land degradation. While the HFCs
and PFCs only form a small share in the total emissions, they are associated emissions in the IPPU
sector for refrigeration and Air Conditioning, Foam Blowing Agents and Fire Protection, and whose
share is likely to increase with accelerated economic growth.
The energy and transport sectors also
show notable growth, as does the
waste and IPPU (Industrial Processes
and Product Use) sectors, reflecting
increasing vehicle use, increasing
urbanization, and industrial activity. If
no 
mitigation 
measures 
are
implemented, the trajectory suggests a
substantial escalation in Somalia’s
carbon footprint by 2035, underscoring
the need for climate action and
sustainable development interventions.
=== PAGE 11 ===
2.4 Climate-related Security Risks
09
Somalia faces a range of climate-related security risks that intersect with existing development,
governance, and humanitarian challenges. It ranks among the five countries worldwide that are most
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This vulnerability is attributed not only to Somalia’s high
exposure to both slow and fast-onset events, including droughts, floods and cyclones, among others,
but more importantly to Somalia's low adaptive capacity and heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture and
pastoralism, both of which are highly sensitive to climate variability and change. With approximately
60% of the population relying on pastoralism and 31% engaged in crop farming, climate change poses
a severe threat to the livelihoods of Somali communities. 
Increasingly frequent and severe climate events such as droughts, floods, and coastal erosion have
intensified competition over natural resources like water and pasture, particularly in rural and pastoral
communities. These pressures can contribute to local tensions and disrupt traditional resource sharing
arrangements. Climate impacts also undermine livelihoods and food systems, contributing to economic
stress and displacement, thus increasing the vulnerability of affected populations. In coastal areas,
sea-level rise and changing marine ecosystems are affecting fishing communities and putting coastal
infrastructure at risk, with implications for maritime governance and security. Climate-induced
displacement has altered mobility patterns, placing added pressure on urban areas and services, and
heightening the risk of resource-related tensions. In some areas, extremist groups take advantage of
these vulnerabilities to extend their influence or disrupt recovery and humanitarian efforts. These
climate-related challenges exacerbate the existing state fragility, with Somalia currently ranking as one
of the world's most fragile states, according to the Fragile State Index 2024.
=== PAGE 12 ===
3. SOMALIA’S POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR CLIMATE
CHANGE
The Somali constitution provides overarching guidance on environmental affairs, especially Article 25
(“Environment”), Article 43 (“Land”), Article 44 (“Natural Resources”) and Article 45 (“Environment”).
Article 25 of the Constitution states that “every Somali has the right to an environment that is not
harmful to their health and well-being, and to be protected from pollution and harmful materials”, while
Article 45 requires residents of Somalia to “participate in the development, execution, management,
conservation and protection of the natural resources and environment”. Arising from the constitution,
Somalia has developed various policy instruments to give effect to its provisions and specifically guide
its response to climate change and its impacts. The country is also a signatory to various regional and
global conventions, treaties and agreements which address climate change and related matters.
The operational development plan for Somalia is the National Transformation Plan (NTP 2025-29),
which aims to create a prosperous and stable Somalia, aligned to Somalia’s Centennial Vision 2060. It
recognizes the importance of addressing climate-related shocks by promoting climate change
mitigation, adaptation and resilience initiatives for economic stability. Somalia developed the National
Climate Change Policy in 2020 (still in draft form) to guide efforts towards achieving the NDP-9 (now
superseded by NTP 2025-29) and moving the country along low-carbon development pathways. The
policy commits the country to building a climate-resilient economy by implementing appropriate climate
change adaptation and mitigation measures. Given Somalia's high vulnerability to climate change, the
policy prioritizes adaptation and resilience as the nation’s primary focus. The Draft National Adaptation
Plan 2024 outlines the country’s adaptation priorities and plans to achieve these. Various sectoral laws,
policies, plans and strategies support the country's climate change response, and some of the key
ones are shown in table 2 below.
Various climate change treaties, conventions and agreements at regional and global levels confer
responsibility for climate change actions on Somalia as a signatory party. Somalia signed the UNFCCC
in 1992, and all its subsequent protocols and agreements - Kyoto and Paris. It is also signatory to the
UNCBD, UNCCD, CITES, Montreal Protocol, amongst others.
As a member of the African Union (AU), it is also signatory to its framework on climate change and
renewable energy policies which hinge upon the continent's blueprint for socioeconomic
transformation, Agenda 2063. It comprises the Committee of African Heads of State and Government
on Climate Change is (CAHOSCC), AU Climate Change and Resilient Development Strategy and
Action Plan (2022-2032); the Africa Adaptation Initiative (AAI); and the African Forest and Landscape
Restoration Initiative (AFR100), amongst others. The policies aim to promote resilience, contribute to
global GHG emission reduction, and accelerate low carbon growth and sustainable development
among member states. Arising from these are various continental resolutions, the latest of relevance of
which is “Mission 300” which aims to ensure that 300 million people in Africa gain access to clean
cooking solutions by 2035. Somalia has recently joined the Climate Vulnerable Forum and the V20
Group of Finance Ministers (CVF-V20). As a member, Somalia will engage in efforts to transform
climate vulnerability into climate prosperity, aligning with the shared vision of resilient, low-carbon
development. Joining the community of 74 CVF-V20 member countries, Somalia will also contribute to
advancing South-South cooperation to collectively address the climate emergency beyond its
economic importance and climate-resilient agriculture emerges as a vital pathway to sustaining
livelihoods, enhancing food security, promoting stability, and supporting peacebuilding efforts.
10
=== PAGE 13 ===
National Policy Documents
Year
1
The National Transition Plan 2025-29 
2025
2
The Somalia National Climate Change Policy
2020
3
Draft National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework
2024
4
Draft Environmental Social Impact Assessment Regulations
2020
5
Draft National Environmental Management Bill
2020
6
National Voluntary Land Degradation Neutrality Targets 2020
2020
7
National Food Security and Nutrition Policy
2020
8
Somali Women’s Charter
2019
9
The Power Master Plan for Somalia
2019
10
The National Environment Policy
2019
11
Integrated Water Resources Management Strategic Plan
2023
12
Somalia National Water Policy and National Water Resource Law
2019
13
The National Electricity Bill
2019
14
National Fertilizer Policy
2019
15
Somali National Disaster Management Policy
2018
16
Recovery and Resilience Framework
2018
17
The Initial National Communication to UNFCCC
2018
18
National Energy policy
2018
19
The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
2015
20
The National Adaptation Programme of Actions
2013
21
UNDP Somalia Gender Equality Strategy (2023-2026)
2023
22
Somali National Action Plan (NAP) for the implementation of the Somali Women’s
Charter and United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 (UNSCR 1325)
2022
23
The Federal Republic of Somalia updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
2021
Table 2 National Policy Documents Inventory.
11
Within the East Africa region, Somalia is signatory to the Regional Convention for the Conservation of
the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden Environment; Protocol concerning Cooperation on Combating
Marine Pollution in cases of Emergency in the Eastern African region; Convention for the protection,
Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region
(Nairobi Convention), and others. All these are consequential in guiding Somalia’s response to climate
change and are the framework upon which this NDC is contingent.
=== PAGE 14 ===
4. ADAPTATION (ARTICLE 7)
12
Long term vision of Somalia’s draft National Adaptation Plan (NAP) 2024 is to create a climate-resilient
nation where the most vulnerable populations, sectors, and ecosystems are protected from the adverse
effects of climate change. According to the Plan, by 2050, Somalia envisions a country where adaptive
capacity is enhanced across all levels of government and society, ensuring that economic development,
food security, and public health are not compromised by climate variability. This requires integrating
ecosystem-based adaptation actions in national development priorities, while addressing systemic
vulnerabilities occasioned by conflict, poverty, gender dimensions, and peace-building efforts.
Somalia’s NDC 3.0 places adaptation
at the core of its climate action
strategy, recognizing the country’s
acute vulnerability to climate-induced
shocks with an estimated cost of 6.330
billion from 2025 through to 2035. The
prioritisation of adaptation in NDC 3.0
is 
not 
only 
a 
necessity 
for
safeguarding 
livelihoods 
and
infrastructure but also a strategic entry
point for achieving broader co-benefits
that support national mitigation goals
(Figure 7). The national investment
framework identifies key adaptation
sub-sectors such as agriculture, water
resource 
management, 
health,
infrastructure, and social protection
that are critical to enhancing climate
resilience 
while 
also 
offering
significant mitigation dividends.
The agriculture, livestock, and fisheries sector, with over USD 1.9 billion in planned investments,
presents a powerful avenue for adaptation-mitigation synergy. Climate-smart agricultural practices,
promotion of sustainable grazing systems, improved veterinary services, and the introduction of
livestock insurance collectively strengthen food systems while reducing methane and nitrous oxide
emissions. Enhancing soil health through regenerative agriculture also contributes to carbon
sequestration and land restoration. Similarly, investments in integrated water resource
management covering both rural and urban water systems improve access and resilience to water
stress while reducing the energy footprint of water trucking and diesel-powered pumps. This shift
creates opportunities to integrate solar-based and gravity-fed systems that support mitigation
objectives.
Public health resilience is also a priority, with USD 800 million allocated to building climate-
responsive health systems. Strengthening healthcare access in climate-vulnerable regions reduces
the need for high-emission emergency responses and supports adaptive human development.
Infrastructure and urban resilience investments such as in roads, ports, and drainage systems are
equally transformative. These investments reduce economic disruptions from climate disasters and
enable the integration of green building materials, nature-based urban solutions, and sustainable 
5   https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/napgn-en-2022-somalia-nap-framework.pdf
5
=== PAGE 15 ===
4.1 Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food Security
13
The adaptation actions in agriculture are planned to increase crop and livestock productivity; enhance the
sector's resilience to climate shocks; and to harness the country’s potential in capture fishery. The sector is
the most critical in Somalia, in terms of employment and its contribution to GDP and exports and thus has
the largest share of the adaptation budget at 32% ($1.9 billion). Beyond its economic importance, climate-
resilient agriculture is a vital pathway to sustaining livelihoods, enhancing food security, promoting stability,
and supporting peacebuilding efforts. From a gender perspective, women in Somalia, who are
disproportionally affected by climate change, due to their roles in the household food production,
agriculture and energy management, face significant barriers to adaptation. These include limited access
to land, credit, agricultural inputs (seeds), information about climate adaptation strategies, and practices.
Addressing those challenges is critical to ensure effective and inclusive climate response. 
transport planning, thereby reducing emissions over time. The inclusion of just transition and social equity
considerations further enhances the co-benefits of adaptation. With targeted investments in green jobs,
access to low-carbon technologies, and gender-responsive safety nets, Somalia’s adaptation measures
also contribute to a more inclusive and decarbonized economy.
Moreover, improved systems for loss and damage tracking, adaptation finance, and climate governance
are essential to anchor adaptation efforts within transparent, accountable, and data-driven frameworks.
This ensures that adaptation planning is not isolated, but dynamically linked to national development and
mitigation priorities. To fully harness these benefits, Somalia’s NDC 3.0 integrates measurable
adaptation-mitigation co-benefit indicators, prioritize ecosystem-based and nature-positive approaches,
and creats cross-sectoral collaboration especially between the environment, energy, agriculture, and
planning sectors. By advancing adaptation as both a climate imperative and a development opportunity,
Somalia can catalyze resilience pathways that also accelerate its low-carbon transition, positioning
adaptation as a driver of systemic transformation under the Paris Agreement.
=== PAGE 16 ===
4.2. Water Resource Management
The planned adaptation actions in water resources management will focus on availability and access to
water for people and livestock; developing water for irrigation; and water governance. The required
investment in the sector is estimated at $1.27 billion, which is 21% of the adaptation budget. Somalia is a
water scarce country, with a daily
consumption of only 14 litres per person, a per capita availability of 411 m3 per year, and water access at
only 52%. This is due to its importance as an enabler in health and productive sectors. Given the role of
water scarcity in heightening local tensions and competition over resources-particularly in drought-affected
areas-investments in equitable and conflict-sensitive water management will also contribute to social
cohesion, stability, and peacebuilding. Women in Somalia are disproportionately affected as they rely on
water for livelihoods and household needs. They bear the burden of water collection as they trek long
distances in search of water exposing them to risks of gender-based violence and time spent collecting
water reduces opportunities for education, income generation, and rest. Thus, a goal of the water
interventions is the integration of women's equal participation and leadership in all aspects of water
governance from rural infrastructure management to urban sanitation design through targeted training, safe
infrastructure planning, and decision-making roles in water associations and conflict resolution. The actions
proposed are:
Enhancing access to water for rural and peri-urban populations and livestock through rehabilitation and
development of wells, dams and boreholes; rural sanitation systems; promotion of water hygiene; water
use efficiency; and water distribution enhancement. 
Development and rehabilitation of urban water supply and sanitation infrastructure; sanitation systems;
development of Solid Waste Management (SWM) systems; and valorisation of water supply.
Rehabilitation and development of irrigation water structures 
Improved water governance and co-management; data systems, research, early warning and
information systems.
Conflict-sensitive water management through measures for equitable water access for all communities;
inclusive and multi-stakeholder water governance; and strengthening of traditional dispute-resolution
mechanisms around shared water resources.
14
The focus will be on sustainable conflict sensitive agricultural development, food systems resilience, and
improved nutrition outcomes, with emphasis on inputs and production through a combination of climate-smart,
gender-responsive actions as follows:
Enhancing land and crop productivity through promotion of climate resilient technologies; drought tolerant
crop varieties and seed systems; conservation tillage; crop diversification and rotation; agroforestry
systems; developing rainfed and irrigated agriculture systems (including seeds, fertilizer etc); and
development of climate resilient value chains.
Sustainable livestock management systems including restoration of degraded pastures; promotion of
sustainable grazing systems and fodder production; expansion of veterinary services to improve livestock
health; promotion of climate resilient livestock practices; introducing livestock insurance; and improving
livestock value chains.
Improving fishery productivity through promotion of marine aquaculture; strengthening governance and co-
management; promotion of sustainable capture fishery practices; adaptive fishing techniques;
strengthening Early Warning Systems (EWS) and surveillance; strengthening enforcement systems;
establishing fish landing ports, market access and value chain development.  
Integrating conflict sensitivity into climate-resilient agriculture interventions by conducting conflict risk
assessments during project design and implementation; promoting inclusive and transparent stakeholder
engagement, particularly in resource allocation and governance; supporting community-based
mechanisms for land, water, and resource dispute resolution; leveraging traditional institutions for
collaborative natural resource management; and targeting livelihood support to vulnerable and
marginalized groups to enhance social cohesion and reduce conflict risks
Empower women in climate-vulnerable communities by improving access to agricultural resources, climate
adaptation information, livelihood opportunities in key sectors (agriculture, livestock, fisheries), and
meaningful participation in natural resource governance and peacebuilding processes.
=== PAGE 17 ===
4.3 Public Health Resilience
4.4 Infrastructure and urban resilience
15
This sector will cost $400 million (13% of total adaptation budget) aimed at building robust proactive health
systems to prevent incidence of disease; enhance capability to respond to emergencies; and increase
access to essential curative services. While the health sector is significant, there are sectors that are more
vulnerable to climate change impacts, like agriculture, , enabling sectors such as water and agriculture are
budgeted elsewhere.  Investments here will include: 
Proactive health measures to reduce the incidences and impacts of disease transmission;
Enhance the health sector’s capacity to respond to climate-induced risks, including disease outbreaks
and heat stress;
Rebuilding and Innovating systems for provision of healthcare to nomadic communities;
Develop climate-resilient health infrastructure accessible to all, including pregnant women, people with
disabilities, and rural populations and provide sexual and reproductive health services during climate
emergencies;
Development of early warning and communication systems for health related risks.
A total of $1,400 billion (23%) will be directed toward improving connectivity, and climate proofing
infrastructure in urban and rural areas. Communication is vital for commerce, and for responding to and
reducing vulnerability to climate shocks. The activities include rehabilitation and development of critical
roads, airports and ports infrastructure; construction and maintenance of bridges and drainage systems to
mitigate flooding in urban areas; and for other climate-related structures. In addition, resilient infrastructure
can help reduce the risk of climate-induced tensions by improving equitable access to services, reducing
displacement pressures, and supporting stability in vulnerable and underserved areas.
=== PAGE 18 ===
16
4.5 Just Transition
4.6 Other Priorities
A just transition is a cornerstone of Somalia’s climate and development strategy, ensuring that the shift to a
low-carbon and climate-resilient future is inclusive, equitable, and socially just. Somalia’s NDC 3.0
recognizes that climate change disproportionately affects vulnerable groups, including women, youth,
informal workers, pastoralist communities, and internally displaced persons. To address this, the adaptation
component prioritizes targeted investments in green job creation and vocational training, with a focus on
reskilling young people and women for emerging climate-resilient sectors such as renewable energy,
sustainable agriculture, and ecosystem restoration.
Moreover, the NDC commits to strengthening gender-responsive adaptation planning by integrating social
protection measures that safeguard livelihoods and well-being in the face of climate shocks. By enhancing
access to low-carbon and affordable technologies such as solar-powered irrigation, clean cooking solutions,
and climate-smart digital tools the strategy aims to empower marginalized communities to participate in and
benefit from the green transition. This sector also promotes inclusive governance and participatory decision-
making processes, ensuring that adaptation strategies are co-developed with those most affected. Through
these integrated actions, Somalia seeks to align its adaptation goals with National Transformation Plan
priorities, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and its broader peacebuilding and social cohesion
agenda . 
6
Somalia’s NDC 3.0 outlines several cross-cutting priorities that act as foundational enablers for effective,
inclusive, and sustainable adaptation outcomes. One of the key pillars is climate education and awareness,
aimed at building a climate-informed citizenry. This includes integrating climate change into school curricula,
supporting community-based education programs, and enhancing the capacity of local media and civil
society to disseminate climate knowledge and early warning information. In tandem, the NDC emphasizes
peace, security, and displacement-sensitive adaptation, acknowledging the complex interplay between
climate impacts, conflict, and mobility. Adaptation efforts are designed to reduce fragility and support
stability in displacement-prone areas, especially through localized solutions that build community resilience.
Another critical area is disability inclusion, ensuring that adaptation measures are accessible to people with
disabilities and are informed by their unique needs and perspectives. This includes designing inclusive
infrastructure, strengthening disability-disaggregated data, and ensuring representation in climate
governance processes. Furthermore, the NDC recognizes the importance of good governance and
knowledge management, committing to improved coordination mechanisms, data systems, and institutional
learning frameworks. Establishing robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems and investing in
research, innovation, and indigenous knowledge will be crucial for tracking progress and informing adaptive
management. Together, these priorities support a whole-of-society approach to adaptation that leaves no
one behind and builds the foundations for long-term climate resilience in Somalia . 
6 & 7 Detailed discussion in section 8
7
=== PAGE 19 ===
5. MITIGATION PATHWAYS (ARTICLE 4)
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
53.4 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
85 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
29.5 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 2035
34%
17
Somalia’s Greenhouse Gas (GHG) mitigation strategies are sector-specific intervention pathways aimed at
achieving a total emission reduction of 29.5 M tCO₂e (34%) at an estimated cost of USD 5.17 billion. This will
reduce the projected emissions from 84.9 MtCO2e to 55.4 MtCO2e under the NDC 3 scenario, with the peak
of 57.5 MtCO2e in 2032 (Figure 8). On a per capita basis, the emission level starts at 2.6 tonnes per person
per year in 2024, peaks at about 2.8 tonnes per person per year in 2030 then declines slightly to 2.7 by 2035.
The mitigation strategy targets five key sectors, and capitalizes on the cost-effective Nature Based Solutions
(NBS) such as Agriculture; Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF). 
The 
other 
sectors 
are 
Energy;
Transportation; 
and 
Waste
Management. 
These 
sectors 
vary
significantly in terms of their cost-
efficiency and potential for large-scale
emission reductions (Figure 9). The
GHG 
mitigation 
plan 
strategically
prioritizes the NBS in land and
agriculture 
sectors 
for 
their 
high
impact, while also addressing cleaner
energy, sustainable transport, and
improved 
waste 
management 
to
ensure a holistic and climate-resilient
development pathway. The details of
each sector mitigation targets and
actions are detailed in subsequent
sections.
=== PAGE 20 ===
5.1 Agriculture
18
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
25.2 MtCO2e
BAU Emission 2035
39.2 MtCO2e
Mitigation Target 2035
4.2 MtCO2e
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in
2035
10.70%
The agriculture sector contributes the highest
to GHG emissions in the country, at 46% and
the GHG abatement under the NDC scenario
is shown above. The mitigation measures in
the agriculture sector are expected to reduce
emissions 
by 
4.24 
MtCO₂e, 
requiring
approximately USD 2.174 billion—the highest
investment among all sectors. This reflects
the intensity and complexity of transitioning to
climate-smart 
agriculture 
and 
improved
livestock practices across dispersed rural
communities. 
The 
mitigation 
measures
include the following:
Improved 
livestock 
and 
manure
management, fodder quality, rotational
grazing, 
rangeland 
restoration, 
and
expansion of veterinary services 
Promotion of Climate Smart Agriculture
practices including crop rotation, drought
resilient crops varieties, conservation
tillage and organic fertilizers.
Scaling up agroforestry and soil conservation practices 
Developing efficient irrigation systems (solar powered drip irrigation), rehabilitation of canals, and
improvements in rice cultivation practices 
Research (e.g. on development of seed systems, fodder technology), dissemination and technology
transfer.
=== PAGE 21 ===
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
21.9 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
34.1 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
19.3 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 2035
57%
5.2 Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF)
sector
19
The LULUCF sector is the second highest
contributor to GHG emissions, but also offers
the highest potential for mitigation with a
target of 19.3 MtCO₂e (65%) emission
reduction. This sector will require USD 1.158
billion, making it the most cost-effective in
terms of emission reduction per dollar
invested. This places nature-based solutions
as the cornerstone of Somalia’s mitigation
plan. Key mitigation actions include; 
Forest 
conservation, 
reforestation,
afforestation, community led tree planting,
and integrating trees in croplands 
Sustainable 
land 
management 
and
reduction of biomass burning 
Reducing deforestation rates through
conservation, landscape restoration, and
enhanced regulation and enforcement 
Mangrove and wetland conservation and
reservation
Development of supportive policy framework 
Mobilization of carbon credits schemes, Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES), and REDD+
Development of national land use planning systems
=== PAGE 22 ===
20
5.3 Energy sector
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
4.1 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
6.4 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
3.2 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in
2035
50%
While not yet a big contributor to GHG emission,
the proposed emission reduction in the sector is
proportionately the highest of all sectors at 50%,
aiming to cut emissions by 3.24 MtCO₂e at an
estimated cost of USD 1.217 billion (Table 4).
Access to sustainable and reliable energy is
critical to Somalia’s climate resilience and
economic development as it powers sectors like
agriculture, 
healthcare, 
and 
industry 
while
reducing dependence on fossil fuels and enabling
a just transition to renewable solutions. Energy
Initiatives in this sector include:
Development of solar and wind energy
systems
Promotion 
of 
improved 
cookstoves 
and
energy-efficient appliances, 
Sustainable 
charcoal 
production 
with,
improved kiln technology
Promoting clean cooking including use of LPG
to replace biomass in domestic energy 
Small scale solar lighting solutions
Solar powered irrigation systems 
Increasing access to modern energy systems and enhancing energy efficiency
=== PAGE 23 ===
5.4 Transportation sector 
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
1.4 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
2.1 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
1.5 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 2035
33%
21
5.5 Solid Waste Management
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
1.6 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
2.6 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
0.2 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 2035
8%
The transport sector’s contribution to
national GHG emissions is relatively
low. The mitigation actions in the
sector are focused on the adoption of
cleaner fuels, promoting electric and
energy efficient vehicles (tuk tuks), and
improvements in public transport which
will result in a reduction of 0.7 MtCO₂e,
with an associated cost of USD 63.7
million.
The Solid Waste Management (SWM)
sector contributes minimally to GHG
emission, 
mainly 
from 
landfill. 
The
mitigation 
measures 
proposed 
here
include construction of controlled landfills
in urban areas; waste-to-energy programs;
and recycling, especially of plastics. These
are projected to reduce emissions by
160,922 tCO₂e at a cost of USD 200,000,
representing the smallest share in both
emissions reduction and budget allocation.
This highlights the potential for low-cost,
high-return interventions in urban waste
management.
=== PAGE 24 ===
5.6 Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) Sector
Baseline GHG Emission 2024
0.3 MtCO2eq
BAU Emission 2035
0.4 MtCO2eq
Mitigation Target 2035
0.1 MtCO2eq
GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 2
25%
22
5.7 Advancing Cooling Solutions in NDC 3.0
The IPPU sectors contribution in emissions
under the BAU and NDC scenarios are
insignificant. Proposed mitigation actions
under the IPPU sector, at a cost of USD 1.6
billion include improving energy efficiency
through cleaner production and integration of
renewable energy; and waste to heat
recovery through capture and reuse, and
control importation of appliances using HFCs
in line with Somalia’s Energy Strategy as
informed by Kigali Amendment (2016)
In addition to the GHG baseline that has identified Somalia sectoral based emission reduction, Somaliahas an
opportunity to introduce a dedicated cooling component into its NDC 3.0, recognizing that sustainable cooling
is a critical priority for both mitigation and adaptation. With rising temperatures and increasing urbanization, the
demand for cooling in Somalia across public health, agriculture, and residential sectors is expected to grow
significantly. However, without targeted interventions, this demand could lead to a sharp rise in greenhouse
gas emissions, particularly from inefficient air conditioning and refrigerant use.
The global cooling sector currently accounts for approximately 7% of global GHG emissions and is projected to
double by 2050 without action. By integrating cooling measures, Somalia will contribute to the Global Cooling
Pledge adopted by 72 countries at COP28 which aims to reduce global cooling-related emissions by 68% by
2050. Somalia’s NDC 3.0 includes mitigation targets focused on reducing emissions from high-GWP
refrigerants (such as HFCs) through adherence to the Kigali Amendment and promoting energy-efficient
cooling appliances (Sec 5.6). In parallel, adaptation goals such as infrastructure and urban resileince, and
integrated public health resilience will address equitable access to cooling in vulnerable communities,
particularly in schools, hospitals, and informal settlements, by promoting passive cooling design, green urban
planning, and nature-based solutions.
=== PAGE 25 ===
23
To operationalize this, Somalia will adopt the six-step methodology recommended in the NDC Cooling
Guide beginning with a national stocktake of cooling needs and emissions, defining baselines, and
formulating measurable targets. MRV indicators tailored to cooling (such as appliance efficiency
standards and cooling access in health and food systems) will be embedded in the NDC’s
transparency framework and its implementation plan. Integrating cooling measures will not only help
Somalia mitigate emissions in the energy and industrial sectors but will also enhance climate resilience
and support health and productivity—making it a high-impact, cross-sectoral priority for NDC 3.0
implementation.
=== PAGE 26 ===
Agroforestry
Climate Smart Agriculture
Feed and Fodder
Veterinary Services
Technology transfer and
Ca aci Buildin
Forest Conservation
Reforestation/Afforestation
Landscape restoration - ASALs
Sustainable land management
deforestation/degradation
reduction
Biomass burning
Sustainability and efficiency in
charcoal roduction
wetland/mangrove degradation
reduction
Electric Vehicles (tuk tuks)
Public Transportation
Improvements
Land fill (Methane capture) =
Controlled dum ites
Waste to energy
Recycling programs
Energy Efficiency Enhancement
Waste-Heat recovery
Control of HFCs
Just transition
Policy and Regulatory
Framework
Total
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
WCWF
LUCLUF
LUCLUF
LUCLUF
LUCLUF
LUCWF
LI-JCLUF
LUCWF
Transportation
Transportation
Waste
Waste
Waste
IPPU
IPPIJ
IPPU
Ha
Ha
Animal
Households
Ha
Ha
Ha
Ha
Ha
Number
Persons
Number
Tons
Tons
50,000
20,000
5,000
4,845 375
300 ooo
120 ooo
50 ooo
2 ooo ooo
50,000
400,000
4,000
50
50,000
5,000
8
3,042
3,042
13
13
13
240
430
250
320
1 200
230
1 200
450
350
320
280
10,000
480
2,500
3
400,000
420
48
10.000
95,361
1.250
0,600
6.300
9.000
6.700
2.750
7.300
134.200
3.000
20.000
2.000
0.164
19013.000
1.400
1.500
0.500
12.00
1.907
8.60
0.006
1.25
1.000
1,550.52
0.000
360.00
0.756
27.60
0.450
60.00
13.417
900.00
0.138
17.50
2.920
128.00
0.537
1.12
0.000
0.50
1.000
24.00
0.010
12.50
2.621
51.20
0.152
3.20
0.004
1.28
0.005
0.15
0.050
0.65
0.030
0.50
0.020
29.597
0.45
350.00
200.00
5,170.05
0.84
0.60
0.09
108.54
25,20
1.38
3.00
45.00
0.88
6.40
0.06
0.03
1.20
0.63
2.56
0.06
0.03
0.003
274.27
24
11.16
8.00
1.16
1441.98
334.80
26.22
57.00
855.00
16.63
121.60
1.06
0.48
22.80
11.88
48.64
3.14
1.25
0.14
0.65
0.50
0.45
350.00
200.00
4,895.78
=== PAGE 27 ===
6. FINANCING ADAPTATION AND MITIGATION
PRIORITIES (2025-2035).
Financing and investment strategies will play a crucial role in the successful implementation of Somalia’s
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC 3.0). Given the country’s vulnerabilities to climate change and
its urgent need for sustainable development, a well-structured financing approach is necessary to
mobilize resources for mitigation and adaptation efforts. Somalia faces significant challenges in securing
adequate funding due to political and economic instability, weak institutional frameworks, and limited
access to international finance, with most partner support committed to humanitarian needs and
relatively little to climate actions.  
In March 2025, the National Climate Finance Unit (NCFU) within the Ministry of Environment and Climate
Change, was formally established. It has been created to strengthen coordination and mobilization efforts
around climate finance. The NCFU will serve as the central point for coordinating climate finance
activities, engaging with development partners, and facilitating access to international and domestic
climate finance mechanisms. 
To ensure transparent implementation of climate actions, Somalia commits to integrate climate finance
into national economic planning which will improve transparency in fund allocation and utilization. It is
noted that Somalia lacks Direct Access Entities (DAEs) to Green Climate Fund (GCF), relying on
international intermediaries, which slows funding. To overcome these systemic barriers, the Somalia
government commits to:
Fast-track the finalization and validation of the Climate Finance Policy and Strategy to streamline the
mobilization and disbursement of international climate finance.
Strengthen national institutions such as the MoECC to meet accreditation requirements, and to
manage and disburse funds efficiently;
Build capacity of inter ministerial teams on resource mobilization from climate funding mechanisms
and international partners and align national climate finance strategy to priorities of climate financing
mechanisms. 
Streamline coordination between ministries (MoECC, Finance, Planning, etc.) and create a
centralized climate finance tracking mechanism within the Aid Information Management System
(AIMS) to enhance transparency in resource flows and implementation.
Promote private sector and blended finance by incentivizing investment in renewables and develop
bankable projects to attract commercial climate finance.
Leverage green bonds and innovative climate financing instruments to raise capital for renewable
energy, climate-resilient agriculture, and infrastructure projects, offering returns to investors while
delivering climate and development co-benefits.
Establish a Diaspora Climate Fund to mobilize remittances, philanthropic contributions, and impact
investments from the Somali diaspora, targeting community-based climate adaptation and mitigation
initiatives.
Integrate de-risking mechanisms into national climate finance policy, including guarantees, blended
finance, and concessional lending, to attract private sector investment in high-impact but high-risk
climate sectors, particularly in fragile and conflict-affected areas.
Develop a climate finance allocation and tracking module in the Somali Finance Management
Information System (MIS). 
25
8 GDP (current US$) - Somalia | Data
=== PAGE 28 ===
Mitigation
Category
Target
(%)
Emissions Reduced
(MtCO₂e)
Cost 
(‘000,000  USD)
Financing Source
Unconditional
5
4.2
274
Domestic/low-cost/ NGO-led
Conditional
29
25.3
4,895
International grants, concessional
loans, green climate finance &
carbon markets
Total
34
29.5
5,170
Blended effort
6.1 Feasibility of Somalia’s NDC 3.0 Mitigation Target by
2035
26
This involves breaking the US$11.50 billion mitigation and adaptation target into smaller investment pipelines
focused on low-cost, community-driven solutions. Engaging the diaspora through green diaspora bonds can
fund renewable energy and environmental restoration projects.
Somalia is framing its mitigation target both as conditional (dependent on international support) and
unconditional (from local resources - Table 5). Given Somalia’s fragile economy and significant challenges, the
country is aiming for an unconditional reduction target of 5%, approximately 4.2 MtCO2e by 2035. This target
seems modest by global standards, however, considering the country's limited economic resources,
infrastructural context and fragility and to balance this with environmental sustainability, this is a realistic starting
point.
Somalia’s financial analysis shows a sharp increase in recurrent expenditures—from 53% of total spending in
2021 to 98% in 2024—which has severely limited the government’s ability to invest in development and climate-
related initiatives. This highlights Somalia’s continued over-reliance on external funding to meet its development
priorities.
Early wins will focus on actions with co-benefits such as jobs, food security, and ecosystem services e.g.
community-based renewable energy, forestry, agriculture, and clean cooking technologies which can build
momentum and attract further finance.
Achieving the NDC 3.0 target through domestic
means alone is unlikely. Access to international
climate finance is crucial, including funds from
the 
Green 
Climate 
Fund 
(GCF), 
Global
Environment Facility (GEF), Adaptation Fund,
and bilateral partnerships under Article 9.
Participation in carbon markets under Article 6 of
the Paris Agreement, with robust measurement,
reporting, and verification systems, will be
crucial. 
blended 
finance 
and 
strategic
prioritization approach will be adopted by
Somalia. 
8
Somalia’s economy is fragile, with a GDP of $10.9 billion in 2023 and 69%  of the population living below the
poverty line (African Development Bank, 2023). Domestic resources are primarily allocated to basic services,
poverty reduction, and humanitarian needs. Foreign direct investment remains low, typically below $500
million annually (IMF, 2023), due to political instability and weak infrastructure.
Table 5: Conditional and unconditional mitigation share.
=== PAGE 29 ===
7. CAPACITY BUILDING, TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT,
AND TRANSFER FOR SOMALIA'S NDC
Somalia recognizes technology transfer and capacity building as critical enablers for achieving its
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) goals. Given Somalia's unique socio-economic circumstances
- including high poverty levels (69% below poverty line), climate vulnerability, and post-conflict recovery
needs - a robust approach to technology deployment is essential. The Ministry of Environment and
Climate Change (MoECC) is coordinating development of a comprehensive Technology Needs
Assessment (TNA) that aligns with Somalia's national development priorities while addressing urgent
climate challenges.
7.1 Capacity Building
Somalia's capacity building efforts must address both immediate climate adaptation needs and long-term
sustainable development goals. The country's Technology Needs Assessment, initiated in 2020 as part
of the TNA Phase IV project, provides a framework for targeted interventions across key sectors. With a
whole of society and all of government approach, the capacity building will target all sectors of Somalia,
including all government ministries departments and agencies; all sectors of communities including the
most vulnerable; all departments of federal member states; the civic society, and other sectors. 
7.1.1 Enhanced Adaptation Strategies
Given Somalia's extreme vulnerability to climate shocks (including five consecutive failed rainy seasons
from 2021-2023 that displaced 1.3 million people), adaptation technologies require urgent scaling:
Expanding beyond basic solar pumps to include IoT-enabled monitoring systems that track water
levels, quality, and usage patterns, helping pastoralist communities manage scarce resources 
Community-Based Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting at scale in urban informal settlements (384
affected by 2023 floods) with training programs for women-led households 
Integrated Early Warning Systems which combine mobile alert systems (reaching 54.8% mobile
penetration) with traditional communication channels to warn pastoralists (70% of population) about
droughts and floods 
Climate-Smart Livestock Management including iintroducing mobile apps for herd tracking,
veterinary services, and market linkages to support Somalia's livestock sector (60-70% of population
dependent) 
7.1.2 Strengthened Mitigation Approaches
With only 12% renewable energy in Somalia's energy mix (42MW out of 345MW total capacity),
mitigation efforts require both technological and behavioral interventions:
Decentralized Renewable Energy Hubs combining solar PV with battery storage and productive use
equipment (e.g., refrigeration, irrigation) to create income-generating opportunities in rural areas 
Clean Cookstove Value Chains, establishing local manufacturing of efficient stoves 
Urban Waste-to-Energy Systems pilot projects in major cities to address growing waste management
challenges while generating energy
27
=== PAGE 30 ===
7.1.3 Institutional capacity development
Establishing climate innovation centres or establishing regional hubs linked to universities to foster
local solutions 
Cross-Sectoral Training Programs, building technical expertise across federal and state ministries,
incorporating traditional knowledge from pastoralist communities 
Youth Climate Corps, engaging Somalia's large youth population in technology deployment and
monitoring 
7.2.1 Water Sector Innovations
Mobile-Enabled Water Kiosks, leveraging Somalia's advanced mobile money systems (used by
Hormuud's 4 million customers) to pay for water services 
Solar desalination units for coastal communities
Fog harvesting technology testing in mountainous regions as supplementary water source 
7.2.2 Agricultural Transformation
Drought-resilient crop packages bundling improved seeds with mobile-based extension services 
Livestock Early Warning (EW)apps using satellite data and 5G connectivity to predict grazing
conditions 
Aquaponics system for urban/peri-urban areas to enhance nutrition security 
7.2.3 Energy Sector Advancements
Hybrid mini grids combining Somalia's 45GW wind potential and solar resources to power economic
zones 
Mobile-enabled energy sharing using Somalia's low mobile data prices to facilitate peer-to-peer
energy trading 
Solar cold storage networks to reduce post-harvest losses along livestock and agricultural value
chains 
7.2.4 Digital Infrastructure for climate action
5G-enabled climate monitoring for real-time environmental data collection 
Blockchain for carbon finance exploring distributed ledger technology to enhance transparency in
mitigation projects 
AI-Powered EW, processing climate data through emerging computing infrastructure
7.2 Technology Development and Transfer
28
=== PAGE 31 ===
To operationalize these enhanced interventions, Somalia will:
1.Strengthen policy coordination by aligning TNA outcomes with National Transformation Plan and
Somalia Power Master Plan through the newly established National Electricity Authority 
2.Leverage international partnerships by deepening engagement with Climate Technology Centre and
Network and NDC Partnership which supported Somalia's enhanced NDC development 
3.Create enabling environment by finalizing regulations for emerging technologies through National
Communications Authority while ensuring cyber-security 
4.Gender-responsive implementation by ensuring 40% women participation in technology programs,
building on UNDP's successful models 
5.Private sector engagement through development of clean energy Public Private Partnership  
frameworks with Power Africa's support to attract investment in renewable energy 
6.Community-led deployment by adapting technologies to nomadic lifestyles through mobile service
units and portable solutions.
Establish technology performance dashboards integrated with National Emergency Operations
Centre 
Conduct annual reviews of Technology Action Plans through multi-stakeholder forums
Link technology transfer outcomes to Somalia's NDC tracking framework and SDG reporting
7.3 Implementation Framework
7.4 Monitoring and Evaluation
29
=== PAGE 32 ===
8. CLIMATE JUSTICE AND SECURITY
8.1 Gender, Youth and other Vulnerable Groups
Inclusion in Climate Actions
30
Climate change exacerbates existing inequalities in Somalia, disproportionately impacting women, youth,
persons with disabilities (PWDs), and indigenous communities due to structural vulnerabilities, rigid
socio-cultural norms, and limited access to resources, services, and decision-making platforms. Women,
in particular, face heightened climate-related risks because of entrenched gender roles, marginalisation
in governance, and restricted access to critical assets and adaptation strategies. Similarly, youth remain
under-engaged in economic sectors and climate action, while persons with disabilities are often excluded
from climate planning and lack access to adaptive infrastructure and inclusive information.
The Somalia NDC 3.0 reaffirms the Federal Government of Somalia’s (FGS) commitment to inclusive and
equitable climate action, placing gender equality, youth engagement, and disability inclusion at the core of
national climate policy. The Somalia National Youth Policy (SNYP) recognizes youth as a vital yet
underutilized resource and calls for greater youth empowerment in climate and development processes.
The FGS also acknowledges the need to integrate PWDs into climate decision-making and program
design to ensure no one is left behind in the climate response. 
The vision of this NDC is a just and resilient future for Somalia, where women, youth, and marginalized
groups are not merely beneficiaries but actively engage in providing climate solutions —driving equitable
policies, green economies, and inclusive adaptation efforts.  This requires transforming women and youth
from vulnerable groups into key drivers of climate innovation, policy, and grassroots action for a just,
sustainable and equitable future through the following.
=== PAGE 33 ===
1. Leadership, representation and inclusive governance  
Achieve 30% representation of women in climate decision-making bodies, with active engagement
from gender ministries in NDC governance, ensuring policies reflect diverse needs.  
Meaningfully include persons with disabilities in climate planning, policy design, and NDC processes,
with dedicated funding for disability-led resilience initiatives.  
Strengthen youth advisory councils and intergenerational partnerships to institutionalize youth
leadership in national and sub-national climate governance.  
 2. Gender-responsive and disability inclusive climate policies  
Mainstream gender and disability considerations across all climate policies, ensuring adaptation
strategies address the unique vulnerabilities of women, children, the elderly, and displaced
populations.  
Conduct intersectional gender and disability analyses to identify gaps in finance, technology, and
knowledge access, shaping targeted interventions.  
Develop accessible climate communication, including braille, sign language, and multilingual
formats, to ensure inclusive participation in climate action.  
 3. Climate Justice & Social Protection  
Expand gender-responsive climate finance and insurance mechanisms to support women farmers,
pastoralists, and displaced communities in recovering from climate shocks.  
Strengthen social safety nets with disability-inclusive disaster preparedness, child protection
systems, and adaptive social programs to prevent harmful coping mechanisms (e.g., child labor,
early marriage).  
 4. Innovation, livelihoods and economic resilience  
Scale up youth and women-led green enterprises in circular economies, renewable energy, and
sustainable agriculture, backed by dedicated funding and skills training.  
Promote accessible climate technologies and ensure marginalized groups, including persons with
disabilities, benefit from low-carbon solutions and adaptive infrastructure.  
 5. Education, capacity building and systemic change  
Integrate climate literacy into school curricula and vocational training, emphasizing gender equity and
disability inclusion.  
Support community-led awareness campaigns to shift behaviors toward sustainability, with
leadership from women, youth, and underrepresented voices.  
6. Child Protection and climate responsive safeguards
Assess and address child-specific climate risks by incorporating child protection into vulnerability
assessments, and ensure access to health, education, and nutrition during climate shocks.
Strengthen climate-responsive social protection and safeguard services, including cash transfers,
safe schools, and child-focused disaster preparedness to prevent harmful coping mechanisms like
child labor and early marriage.
Promote child participation and awareness by supporting climate education in schools and engaging
children and youth in climate action and decision-making processes.
31
=== PAGE 34 ===
A critical aspect of Somalia's' transition to clean and resilient development is the promotion of a just
transition, which advances resilient environmentally sustainable economies in a way that is inclusive, by
creating decent work opportunities, reducing inequality and by leaving no one behind. This involves
consideration for vulnerable sectors of society. Somalia Just Transition strategy aims to shift towards
sustainable development by addressing climate vulnerability, promoting inclusive economic growth and
ensuring equitable resource distribution while recovering from conflict and instability. 
To achieve a just transition, the following will be done:
Prioritize vulnerable groups by explicitly addressing their needs in policies and plans, and climate
actions; include their voices in decision making; and actively include a focus on impacts of climate
shocks and actions on vulnerable groups in all Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV)
systems.
Emphasize all of government and whole of society approach in all climate actions, and in peace
building and conflict resolution in all climate programming.
Promote the creation of green jobs, particularly in sectors affected by climate change and climate
actions such as energy, agriculture, and related sectors.
Support skill development and the reskilling of affected workers and vulnerable groups to prepare
them for opportunities in a green economy.
Provide social protection for workers and vulnerable groups affected by climate change and the shift
to low-carbon, climate-resilient economies, with a focus on those in energy, agriculture, and other
impacted sectors.
Incorporate traditional knowledge, leadership systems, and community led approaches in planning
for climate actions.
Ensure availability, affordability, and resilience of sustainable, low-carbon alternative technologies to
improve accessibility for vulnerable groups, while promoting an enabling environment for sustainable
enterprises that can leverage these technologies.
Actively support small and medium scale businesses to drive dissemination and adoption of clean
energy, and other low carbon technologies.
Promote social dialogue to inform the design and implementation of climate and just transition
policies and programmes.
Somalia is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate shocks, and loss and damage is critical in all
climate programming in the country. Somalia has emerged from six failed rainy seasons since 2000,
which killed millions of livestock, decimated crops, and displaced millions, leading to food insecurity for
over 8 million people. The direct climate attributable losses from floods and drought from 2000 - 2021 are
estimated at 3.3% of GDP .
To effectively address the escalating impacts of climate-induced Loss and Damage (L&D) in Somalia,
the following strategic actions are proposed to strengthen institutional frameworks, financing
mechanisms, and community resilience.
9
8.2 Climate Justice
32
8.3 Loss and Damage
9 IGAD CAEP, 2024. Somalia’s Loss and Damage Assessment. Policy Brief, IGAD Centre for Climate Adoption and
Environmental Protection, Mogadishu, Somalia. http://www.
=== PAGE 35 ===
To effectively address the escalating impacts of climate-induced Loss and Damage (L&D) in Somalia,
the following strategic actions are proposed to strengthen institutional frameworks, financing
mechanisms, and community resilience.
Establish structures and systems for reporting, cataloguing, and quantifying climate attributable direct
and indirect losses and damages from all economic sectors and communities and integrate L&D
assements in MRV systems.
Develop a national L&D financing strategy, a dedicated L&D Fund, and mobilize funds from climate
finance sources and international partners for the fund.
Lobby for simplified mechanisms to access funds for climate action under L&D.
Build capacity for resource mobilization and utilization and enhance transparency in the
disbursement of L&D funds. 
Address slow onset climate shocks such as sea level rise and desertification, alongside extreme
climate shocks in L&D considerations by integrating them into national climate policies, especially
through early warning systems, land use planning, and ecosystem-based approaches 
In addition to the proposed loss and damage interventions in Somalia, a comprehensive approach to
addressing both sudden-onset and slow-onset climate-related impacts is important. Key investments
include restoring degraded rangelands and enhancing drought-resilient livestock systems, with an
allocation of USD 200 million from the adaptation budget (Table 3). These interventions aim to restore
livelihoods, build pastoral resilience, and reduce vulnerability to recurrent droughts. USD 500 million is
allocated to improve rural and peri-urban water supply systems, an urgent priority to address water
scarcity and reduce displacement risks. These investments are vital for safeguarding vulnerable
communities who depend heavily on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture and pastoralism.
Somalia experiences severe climate vulnerability and protracted conflict. The country experiences
frequent and intensifying droughts, floods, and extreme weather events, which strain already scarce
resources such as water, pasture, and arable land. These climate shocks disproportionately affect
pastoralist and agropastoralist communities, often triggering displacement, disrupting livelihoods, and
exacerbating local tensions over resource access. The fragile governance environment, combined with
weak institutions and inter-clan rivalries, heightens the risk that climate impacts will escalate into broader
insecurity. Climate-induced displacement and competition over resources have also been linked to
increased recruitment by armed groups, especially youth and in areas with limited state presence.
Addressing climate, peace, and security (CPS) risks therefore requires a deliberate, coordinated, and
conflict-sensitive approach to climate action.
To ensure that all climate actions—both mitigation and adaptation—contribute to peace and stability,
Somalia will adopt conflict-sensitive approaches across planning, implementation, and monitoring. This
involves integrating conflict risk analysis into climate policy and programming, and promoting inclusive,
transparent governance of natural resource access, use, and management. 
Mitigation measures such as reforestation, renewable energy deployment, and land-use change will be
designed through participatory processes that avoid reinforcing existing grievances and support
equitable benefit-sharing. Adaptation efforts, particularly in fragile and displacement-affected regions, will
focus on strengthening climate-resilient livelihoods, reducing competition over scarce resources, and
enhancing community-based early warning systems.
33
8.4 Climate, Conflict Sensitivity and Peacebuilding
=== PAGE 36 ===
In all sectors, focus will be on building the capacity of local institutions, improving coordination and data
at the sub-national/federal member state level, and fostering collaboration among stakeholders to
enhance social cohesion and resilience. Do No Harm principles will be applied to address underlying
drivers of conflict, including social exclusion, gender inequality, and clan-based divisions.
To strengthen the integration of Climate, Peace, and Security (CPS) into Somalia’s climate response, the
following specific actions will be undertaken:
Promote adaptation and mitigation actions that mitigate potential conflict risks (e.g., unequal resource
distribution, exclusionary practices) and promote co-benefits for peace and social cohesion.
Prioritize climate finance proposals which integrate peacebuilding outcomes in climate actions,
especially in conflict-affected and displacement-prone areas.
Include indicators that track CPS outcomes in Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) systems
such as reduction in resource-based conflicts, improved access to climate-sensitive livelihoods, and
increased participation of marginalized groups in climate governance.
Strengthen regional cooperation on climate-security issues through existing platforms such as IGAD
and the African Union, focusing on joint conflict-sensitive resource management, transboundary early
warning systems, and harmonized policy responses to climate-induced displacement and migration.
Support national and local institutions to mainstream CPS considerations in planning and budgeting
processes, and to civil society actors and local communities to actively engage in CPS-sensitive
climate governance.
34
This is a cross-cutting issue that impacts on all sectors and is projected to cost 210 million of the
adaptation budget. It focuses on Somalia's commitment to proactively anticipate and manage risks,
enhancing preparedness, and reducing vulnerabilities across sectors and communities. This will support
early warning systems, emergency response, and community-level risk management to reduce the
impact of floods, droughts, and other climate-related hazards.
The private sector is a vital engine for climate action in Somalia, with untapped potential to accelerate the
implementation of the country's NDC 3.0. As Somalia moves toward operationalizing Article 6 of the Paris
Agreement, creating an enabling environment for private sector engagement especially in carbon
markets will be central to delivering mitigation outcomes, mobilizing climate finance, and enhancing low-
carbon development.
Somalia’s NDC 3.0 identifies priority mitigation and adaptation actions in sectors where the private sector
can actively participate. These include renewable energy, climate-resilient agriculture, waste
management, and reforestation and land restoration. For example, private energy developers can invest
in solar mini-grids for off-grid rural communities, reducing reliance on diesel generators and generating
measurable emission reductions. Similarly, agribusinesses can apply climate-resilient irrigation systems
or improved livestock practices to reduce methane and nitrous oxide emissions, which can be quantified
and monetized as carbon credits under Article 6.4 or through the voluntary carbon market.
8.5 Disaster Risk Reduction
8.6 Private Sector Engagement
=== PAGE 37 ===
The private sector can also benefit from bilateral agreements under Article 6.2, where international
buyers purchase Internationally Transferred Mitigation Outcomes (ITMOs). These transactions can
channel foreign investment into green businesses, enhance infrastructure, and create jobs, especially if
aligned with co-benefits like clean energy access, gender inclusion, and job creation.
However, to unlock this potential, Somalia must establish a clear Article 6 governance framework,
including:
A Designated National Authority (DNA) to approve projects and authorize ITMOs
Transparent MRV systems 
A national carbon registry to track credits
Moreover, the government can do engagement by offering policy incentives such as tax exemptions for
green technologies, fast-track licensing for climate-aligned investments, and inclusion of private actors in
national climate finance dialogues. Business associations, local entrepreneurs, and diaspora investors
can be mobilized to co-develop projects that generate both climate and economic returns.
In summary, Somalia’s NDC 3.0 presents a new frontier for climate-compatible private investment. By
building trust, streamlining procedures, and creating credible carbon finance pathways, the private sector
can become a central partner in delivering a resilient, low-emission future for Somalia.
35
=== PAGE 38 ===
9. MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
36
The MoECC acts as the central coordinating ministry responsible for leading NDC implementation, monitoring,
reporting, and verification (MRV), and ensuring consistency with international obligations under the Paris
Agreement. The Ministry facilitates cross-sectoral collaboration and ensures the integration of mitigation and
adaptation measures into national planning.
Supporting this effort is the Whole-of-Government Mechanism, which operates through the Inter-Ministerial
NDC Taskforce. This taskforce includes representatives from all key line ministries both at the federal and
federal member state levels as well as national commissions such as the Somali Disaster Management
Agency (SoDMA). This mechanism fosters coordination, avoids duplication, and ensures that each sector
plays its part in delivering on NDC targets.
On the other side, the Whole-of-Society Engagement pillar brings together non-state actors who are vital for
inclusive climate action. This includes civil society organizations, academia, research institutions, the private
sector, and marginalized groups including PWD, youth and women. Development partners and UN agencies
also participate under this pillar, providing technical and financial support while promoting policy dialogue and
capacity development.
The operational arm of this implementation model is the NDC Technical Working Group, comprising
specialized units and experts. These include the MRV and GHG Inventory Unit, the National Designated
Authority (NDA), and National Transformation Plan (NTP) secretariat, the Climate Finance Unit, and sectorial
mitigation and adaptation experts. This group translates policy direction into technical outputs, ensures data
accuracy, and supports access to climate finance mechanisms such as the GCF.
All these components are interconnected. The government mechanism and society engagement pillars
interact regularly with the technical working group, ensuring that both policy and practice are evidence-based
and inclusive. Through this integrated and participatory model, Somalia’s NDC 3.0 implementation is set on a
strong foundation for coordinated, transparent, and accountable climate action.
To effectively implement this NDC, Somalia
has 
established 
a 
clear 
and 
inclusive
coordination model that ensures coherence
across government institutions and active
participation from society at large. This model
is rooted in strong political leadership, led by
the Cabinet, and operationalized through the
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
(MoECC), which serves as the national
coordinating authority for climate action.
At the top of the structure, the Cabinet
provides high-level political leadership and
ensures that climate priorities are aligned with
national development objectives. This political
anchoring is critical for embedding climate
commitments 
into 
broader 
government
policies and securing buy-in across sectors.
=== PAGE 39 ===
A critical enabler to effective implementation of sectoral climate actions is an enabling policy and
regulatory framework. Whereas the policy states the aspirations with respect to specific sectors, the
regulatory framework provides mechanism for operationalization of the aspiration. Thus, a policy
framework consisting of policies, strategy laws and regulations and plans must be put in place to enable
effective implementation of climate action. The policy framework must align to the critical instruments
including the constitution, sectoral laws and regulations and economic planning instruments such as the
recently adopted NTP. It is critical that an assessment is made of theses frameworks and enabling
instruments developed to address gaps and other identified requirements in the framework. A budget of
USD 200 million has been allocated for the development of policy and regulatory frameworks under this
NDC (see Table 4)
37
=== PAGE 40 ===
The Biennial Update Report (BUR), submitted by non-Annex I parties to the UNFCCC represents a
significant step forward in the operationalization of an MRV system. Somalia’s first BUR proposes an MRV
system with five components: MRV of emissions, MRV of mitigation actions, MRV of adaptations, MRV of
support systems, and MRV of NTP and SDG as shown in the diagram below. The MRV of emissions
involves systematic tracking of GHG emissions to establish baselines and identify trends to inform policy
making. It is based on IPCC 2006 Reporting Guidelines, including, under this NDC, emissions from energy,
industrial processes and product use (IPPU), waste, agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU)
sectors. Somalia first GHG emission inventory of 2025 will form the basis for monitoring future GHG
emission trends. The country will comply with its climate reporting commitments under the UNFCCC and
the Paris Agreement through submission of subsequent Biennial Technical Reports (BTRs) and National
Communications (NCs) as required of its LDC status. 
MRV of adaptation actions ensures that the nation can manage and mitigate climate risks effectively, refine
the efficacy of their adaptation measures, and ensure accountability. An important aspect for Somalia, in
this regard, is monitoring the impacts of adaptation actions on marginalised and vulnerable sectors of the
communities, due to the high gender and youth inequalities in climate justice. The Paris Agreement Articles
7.1 and 7.9 requires monitoring of adaptation actions through a “global stocktake”  , and at the national
levels. To achieve this, Somalia is developing an online centralized hub for data collection and analysis, to
facilitate tracking of adaptation progress across the country. The country has also established the MoECC
as a coordinating framework for M&E of climate actions. It is also developing a regulatory instrument that
compels all federal institutions, federal member states, and non-state actors to provide annual reports on
their adaptation activities.
To track financial support from partners, Somalia launched the Aid Information Management System
(AIMS) in 2019. This platform functions as a comprehensive repository of external financial support
information and provides MRV of climate support to Somalia. AIMS   enables a more coordinated approach
among donors, facilitates the strategic planning and allocation of resources by the Somali government, and
promotes transparency by making information accessible to the public.  
10. MONITORING REPORTING AND VERIFICATION
(MRV)
38
10
11
10  Climate Change Expert Group Paper No.2017(3): Insights from national adaptation monitoring and evaluation systems
11 https://mop.gov.so/index.php/home/aims/
=== PAGE 41 ===
39 
Annex 1: Information to Facilitate Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) 
 
1. Quantified information on the reference point 
(a)         Reference year(s), base year(s), reference 
period(s) or other starting point(s); 
The base year is 2024 for GHG emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) nitrous oxide (N2O) and 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
(b)         Quantifiable information on the reference 
indicators, their values in the reference year(s), 
base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting 
point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year;  
 
Total emissions in base year (2024): total provisional estimate: 54.3 MtCO2eq. 
Current target year level (2035) estimate (BAU) conditional (29%): 29.5 MtCO2eq. 
Current target year level (2035) estimate (BAU) unconditional (5%): 4.2 MtCO2eq. 
 
 
(c)             For strategies, plans and actions referred 
to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, 
or policies and measures as components of 
nationally 
determined 
contributions 
where 
paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to 
provide other relevant information; 
Not applicable 
 
 
(d)              Target relative to the reference indicator, 
expressed numerically, for example in percentage 
or amount of reduction; 
As indicated in 1(b) as below 
Baseline GHG Emission 2024 
54.3 MtCO2eq 
BAU Emission 2035 
84.9 MtCO2eq 
Mitigation Target 2035 
29.5 MtCO2eq 
Unconditional Emission Reduction (%) Relative to 
BAU in 2035 (5%) 
4.2 MtCO2eq 
Conditional GHG Reduction (%) Relative to BAU in 
2035 (29%) 
25.3 MtCO2eq 
 
 
 
 
(e)               Information on sources of data used in 
quantifying the reference point(s); 
Current base year and target year level estimates are based on Greenhouse Gas Inventory covering 2000–2024 from 
Federal Government of Somalia and secondary sources 
(f)                Information on the circumstances under 
which the Party may update the values of the 
reference indicators 
Somalia revises its total net emissions and removals estimates biennially to incorporate new data, improved 
methods and changes to international guidelines. Further, Somalia is in the process of developing an LT-LEDS which
=== PAGE 42 ===
40 
may necessitate revision of emission reduction targets in the future.  Achievement of Somalia’s NDC 3.0 targets will 
be assessed by comparing total net GHG emissions and removals in 2035 with the target year level.  
2. Time frames and/or periods for implementation  
(a)              
Time frame and/or period for 
implementation, including start and end date, 
consistent with any further relevant decision 
adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving 
as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris 
Agreement (CMA); 
1 January 2025 - 31 December 2035 
(b)           
Whether it is a single-year or multi-year 
target, as applicable. 
Single-year target in 2035 
3. Scope and coverage 
(a)     General description of the target;  
Somalia’s second NDC target 5 key sectors (energy, agriculture, LULUCF, waste, and industrial processes and product 
use) for emissions reduction target. The target year level is at least 34% reduction in total net GHG emissions and 
removals in 2035 compared to the base year. 
(b)      Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered 
by 
the 
nationally 
determined 
contribution, 
including, 
as 
applicable, 
consistent 
with 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
guidelines; 
Sectors: Somalia’s second NDC target covers the following sectors: energy, agriculture, LULUCF, waste, and industrial 
processes and product use.  
 
Greenhouse gases covered in targets are CO2, CH4, N2O, and HFCs. 
 
LULUCF pools covered: All LULUCF pools are included in the NDC: above ground biomass, below ground biomass, 
litter, deadwood soil organic carbon and stocks of harvested wood product 
(c)      How the Party has taken into consideration 
paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP .21; 
Somalia includes emissions and removals from sectors and gases as stated in 3(b) and will continue to include them. 
(d)        
Mitigation co-benefits resulting from 
Parties’ adaptation actions and/ or economic 
diversification plans, including description of 
specific projects, measures and initiatives of 
Parties’ adaptation actions and/or economic 
diversification plans 
The main adaptation actions proposed in the NDC are in AFOLU, Energy, Water resource management, public health 
and infrastructure and urban resilience.  The co benefits by sector are as follows: 
Agriculture, livestock and food systems: 
● 
Carbon sequestration 
● 
Cutting charcoal burning reduces GHG emissions through sustainable land management 
● 
Improved fodder and livestock management reduces methane emissions 
● 
Reduced area under slash-and-burn avoids emissions from unsustainable LULUCF 
Energy 
● 
Transition to alternative cooking systems to charcoal reduces emissions 
● 
Efficient cookstoves reduces emissions and improves household health from particulates 
● 
Installation of solar lanterns, mini grids, etc reduces fossil fuel use and which emissions 
● 
Efficient charcoal production techniques reduce emissions from unsustainable LULUCF
=== PAGE 43 ===
41 
Fisheries and coastal/marine environment 
● 
Blue carbon storage – greater than terrestrial systems 
● 
Fuel efficiency and transition to solar powered fishing systems, reduces emission from fossil fuels 
Water Resource Management 
● 
Renewable energy transition reduces emissions 
● 
Reduced energy intensity in moving to drip irrigation 
Public health 
● 
Mobile based early warning systems reduces emissions in rural areas 
Infrastructure and Urban resilience 
● 
Use of low carbon materials and systems 
Others 
● 
Gender and youth inclusion in clean cookstoves programmes 
● 
Conflict prevention, which is a driver of unsustainable resource use, avoiding emissions 
 
4. Planning processes: 
(a) Information on the planning processes that the 
Party 
undertook 
to 
prepare 
its 
nationally 
determined contribution and, if available, on the 
Party’s 
implementation 
plans, 
including, 
as 
appropriate:  
 
This NDC aligns with Somalia’s long-term carbon-neutral development strategies, which aims to mobilize climate 
finance and investment for future economic growth and development.  It also aligns with the country's National 
Transformation Plan 2025-2029, and other development strategies, and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
The NDC has been developed following a whole of society and whole of government approach, which involved 
consultations with all government ministries, departments and agencies and federal member states.  Further 
consultations were held with various sectors of the communities at federal member states level, with civic society, 
international humanitarian organizations, representatives of partners governments, and UN agencies.   
 
This culminated in the development of a draft document, which was then validated with the same groups.  The 
drafting process required the development of a stocktake on progress with implementation of NDC 2.0 and an GHG 
emission inventory.  These formed the basis for development of proposed adaptation and mitigation actions.  The 
key policy documents forming the basis of the NDC 3 are in Table 2 (National Policy Documents Inventory) and 
includes the National transformation Plan 2025-2029; Draft National Adaptation Plan Framework 2024; the Somalia 
Power Masterplan 2019; the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2015; and the NDC 2021 – 2030.    
 
As a low GHG-emitting country (contributing 0.019% of global emissions), while being highly vulnerable to climate 
change, Somalia prioritizes NDCs adaptation and resilience actions. Therefore, domestic funds will be prioritized for 
adaptation over mitigation measures. Importantly, gender issues will be prioritized to reduce vulnerability of 
marginalized sections of the community to climate shocks. Furthermore, integrated approaches will be pursued that
=== PAGE 44 ===
42 
align climate action, peacebuilding, and security strategies as called for by the National Transformation Plan 
(2025–2029). 
 
i. 
Domestic 
institutional 
arrangements, 
public 
participation and engagement 
with local communities and 
indigenous 
peoples, 
in 
a 
gender-responsive manner; 
The Federal Government of Somalia, recognizing the importance of climate change in the economic, social, and 
environmental development of the country, established a full-fledged Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
(MoECC) at the federal level. One of the key focuses of the Ministry is to ensure that a reviewed and updated NDC 
takes cognizance of the UNFCCCC’s protocols and agreements that influence the NDCs of its party members and to 
develop an NDC implementation plan. The MoECC initiated a comprehensive review process to update its NDC in 
line with the UNFCCCC guidelines. The review process was designed to accomplish several key objectives, including 
developing performing NDC 1 stocktake, an NDC Action Plan for Priority Sectors and sub-sectors, identifying the 
enabling environment and barriers to implementing adaptation and mitigation actions, and assessing and mapping 
potential financial resources to support NDC actions. 
 
Reviewing and updating the NDC involved active participation from relevant government ministries at national and 
sub-national levels. Furthermore, non-state actors, academic and research institutions, the private sector, civil 
society organizations, vulnerable groups including women groups and youth, and development partners were 
actively involved.  
 
The review process was undertaken by a task force comprising senior experts and officials from various sub-sectors 
who have been analyzing and reviewing all relevant national and sub-national policy documents, strategic plans, and 
other programmatic documentation relevant to reviewing the NDC. The updated NDC also seeks to align with 
long-term carbon-neutral strategies, which will leverage major technological advances and attract climate finance 
and investment for future economic growth and development. 
 
In addition to these key objectives, the updated NDC also aims to increase the country's resilience to the impacts of 
climate change, which has already affected the population's livelihoods and will continue to do so in the future. It is 
worth noting that the updated NDC is aligned with the country's development strategy and several Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), such as SDG 13 (Climate Action), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), and SDG 15 (Life 
on Land), along with other goals that foster sustainable development. By achieving these goals, the updated NDC 
aims to prepare the government and people of Somalia for achieving economic and sustainable development while 
preserving the environment and improving access to basic social services and increasing productivity. 
 
The government of Somalia is committed to mainstreaming gender equality across its development and climate 
change policies and plans, including Somalia's National Transformation Plan (NTP) 2025–2029, which represents a 
comprehensive commitment to inclusive development, with gender equality and women's empowerment as key 
components of Somalia's national transformation agenda. It recognizes the critical need to actively pursue greater
=== PAGE 45 ===
43 
involvement of women, youth, people with disabilities, and other marginalized groups, which NDC 3.0 will build 
upon.  
 
This will be pursued by recognizing and mainstreaming the different needs and concerns of men, women, and other 
groups and ensuring effective and inclusive participation in planning and implementation processes to ensure that 
policies are gender-sensitive and include strategies for for these vulnerable groups’ empowerment. This will be done 
by engaging with NGOs working with these groups to strengthen their capacities to mobilize, participate, and 
advocate for change; making deliberate efforts to tailor information packaging and communication to diverse groups 
to improve inclusion; providing opportunities to participate in workshops and meetings; and contributing 
perspectives that can influence greater inclusion and equality.  
 
Critical gender issues exist across sectors. Hence, promoting gender equality is crucial for effective climate 
adaptation and mitigation in Somalia. The country must be supported in undertaking comprehensive and in-depth 
gender analysis to inform gender integration across climate adaptation and mitigation sectors. There is a need to 
build the capacities of key stakeholders at all levels, including decision-makers, to mainstream gender in climate 
actions. 
 
ii. 
Contextual matters, including, 
inter alia, as appropriate:  
a) National circumstances, 
such 
as 
geography, 
climate, 
economy, 
sustainable 
development 
and 
poverty eradication. 
b) Best 
practices 
and 
experience related to 
the preparation of the 
nationally determined 
contribution. 
c) Other 
contextual 
aspirations 
and 
Somalia, a nation strategically positioned in the Horn of Africa, exhibits a diverse and complex geographical 
landscape that has profoundly influenced its socio-economic and environmental conditions. With an extensive 
coastline along the Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden, Somalia occupies a land area of approximately 637,660 km², 
making it one of the largest countries in the region. Its topographical variations, encompassing low-lying coastal 
plains, interior plateaus, and mountainous highlands in the north, contribute to distinct ecological zones that shape 
human settlement patterns, economic activities, and environmental vulnerabilities. 
 
Despite its vast natural endowments, the country remains highly susceptible to climatic fluctuations, a factor that 
significantly constrains agricultural productivity, water security, and sustainable development. The country’s 
classification as predominantly arid to semi-arid, combined with erratic precipitation patterns and prolonged 
drought cycles, renders it one of the most climate-vulnerable nations globally. As evidenced by its ranking of 164th 
out of 187 countries in the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) Index, Somalia faces profound 
challenges in climate adaptation and resilience-building1 
 
1 ND-GAIN, 2024 Report
=== PAGE 46 ===
44 
priorities acknowledged 
when joining the Paris 
Agreement; 
In December 2023, Somalia reached the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Completion Point, securing full debt 
relief. This milestone is expected to reduce Somalia’s debt-to-GDP ratio from 41% in 2022 to just 6%2, freeing up 
fiscal space for critical development and climate adaptation projects. Access to new financial resources provides 
Somalia with an opportunity to strengthen food security, expand renewable energy, and implement large-scale 
adaptation programs that can safeguard key economic sectors. 
Somalia’s climate is dominated by hot and dry conditions, with mean annual temperatures ranging from 25°C to 
35°C3. These high temperatures are compounded by erratic rainfall patterns, with annual precipitation varying from 
100 mm to 600 mm4, depending on the region. Coastal areas, which experience higher humidity levels (about 60%), 
contrast sharply with the inland desert regions where humidity levels drop to as low as 20%. This stark variation in 
humidity influences agricultural and pastoral activities, with areas receiving less rainfall being more prone to 
desertification and droughts5 
 
Somalia's climate has been characterized by significant variability, with distinct seasonal and spatial differences in 
temperature and precipitation. The country primarily experiences arid to semi-arid conditions, with vast portions 
classified as desert. Since 1950, average annual temperatures have increased at a rate of approximately 0.1°C to 
0.3°C per decade, with a notable rise of 1.1°C observed in the decade leading up to 2010 (IPCC, 2023). This warming 
trend has led to more frequent and intense heat waves, exacerbating challenges for communities reliant on rain-fed 
agriculture and livestock. 
 
Precipitation patterns have also become increasingly erratic, with most regions receiving less than 300 mm of 
annual rainfall. Somalia’s two primary rainy seasons, Gu (April–June) and Deyr (October–December), have shown 
increased variability, with shorter, more intense rainfalls interspersed with prolonged droughts. These fluctuations 
have undermined agricultural stability, disrupted water availability, and contributed to food insecurity and 
displacement. 
Over the past three decades, Somalia has witnessed a rapid shift in its climate, with an average temperature 
increase of 1.4°C since 1990, a rate faster than the global average (IPCC, 2023). The Horn of Africa, where Somalia is 
5 Climate Change Projections and the Associated Potential Impacts for Somalia." American Journal of Climate Change 7.02 (2018): 153. 
 
4 Somalia Water and Land Information Management system, FAO/UNDP 2022. 
3 World Bank. Climate Change Portal. Somalia 2024. 
2 International Monetary Fund. 2023. Somalia: Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative-Completion Point.
=== PAGE 47 ===
45 
located, is experiencing accelerated warming compared to the broader East African region. Future projections from 
GIZ EAC climate studies suggest that by 2080, temperatures could rise by an additional 1.4°C to 2.6°C, further 
intensifying droughts, floods, and desertification, exacerbating the country’s vulnerabilities 
 
Somalia’s path to economic recovery and sustainable development is deeply intertwined with its response to 
climate change. The country faces a dual challenge: rebuilding institutions and economic foundations while 
addressing escalating climate shocks that threaten its primary economic sectors such as agriculture and livestock. As 
part of its national transformational agenda, Somalia is working to align economic growth with global climate 
commitments, particularly through its NDC 3. 
 
Since the establishment of the Federal Government of Somalia in 2012, the country has demonstrated resilience, 
outpacing many fragile and conflict-affected nations in economic growth. Between 2013 and 2020, GDP grew by an 
average of 2% annually, with a recovery to 3.3% in 2021. However, persistent droughts, supply chain disruptions, 
and worsening global economic conditions caused a slowdown in 2022, reducing GDP growth to 2.4%. Projections 
for 2023 and 2024 anticipate a rebound to 2.8% and 3.7%, respectively, driven by stabilizing conditions and 
international financial support6. 
 
Somalia’s economic backbone is formed by agriculture and livestock which accounts for over 65% of GDP and 
employs more than 70% of the workforce, and it generates 80% of export earnings7. However, these sectors are 
highly vulnerable to climate variability, particularly prolonged droughts and erratic rainfall. Recurrent climate shocks 
have significantly impacted food security, displaced millions, and increased reliance on humanitarian assistance. The 
2020–2023 drought, one of the worst in decades, led to widespread livestock losses, crop failures, and a 
humanitarian crisis. According to the Ministry of Health Somalia, the drought has engulfed more than 71,000 people 
40% of whom were children, underscoring the urgent need for climate adaptation and resilience-building 
investments. 
 
A key economic challenge for Somalia is low household earnings and widespread income inequality. The country’s 
per capita GDP remains among the lowest in the world, at approximately US$580 in 20228. Household incomes vary 
widely based on location, with urban households typically earning more than their rural counterparts due to better 
8 World Bank. (2023). Somalia Poverty and Equity Brief. (https://databank.worldbank.org/source/poverty-and-equity-database) 
7 Ministry of Planning: Somalia Economic Outlook (https://mop.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/SOMALI-ECONOMIC-OUTLOOK-English.pdf) 
6 World Bank. 2022. Gross Domestic Product, Somalia, current US$.
=== PAGE 48 ===
46 
access to markets, services, and employment opportunities9. However, even in urban areas, informal employment 
dominates, and wages remain low10. It is estimated that more than 69% of Somalis live on less than US$2 per day11, 
highlighting the urgent need for economic diversification and job creation. 
Somalia joined the Convention in 2009 as a party not included in Annex I to the Convention. Thus, Somalia is among 
developing nations that are not themselves heavy carbon emitters, but which have high vulnerability index, owing 
to their fragile ecosystems, limited adaptation capacities, and limited capacity to initiate and execute adaptation and 
mitigation measures. 
 
By being a member of the UNFCCC, Somalia has ratified a number of international instruments and frameworks for 
GHG reduction, and protection of the Ozone Layer; including the Montreal Protocol of 1987 for controlling the 
production and consumption of substances listed as harmful to the Ozone Layer; the Vienna Convention of 1985 for 
the Protection of the Ozone Layer, for which the annual Conference of Parties (COP) have continued with monitoring 
of ozone layer depletion; Kyoto Protocol of 1997 for regional and global collaboration for climate action; and Paris 
Agreement of 2015 that aims to limit global temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. 
In 2015, Somalia submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in accordance with decisions 
1/CP.19 and 1/CP.20 of the UNFCCCC, and after ratification of the Paris Agreement in April 2016, the INDC became 
Somalia's first NDC. Since ratifying the Paris Agreement, Somalia has established and implemented several 
significant climate change response policies at national and sub-national levels, such as the National Climate Policy 
and National Environment Policy.  
 
According to decision 1/CP.21 paragraph 24, which requests parties to communicate or update their NDC by 2020, 
Somalia reviewed and updated its NDC for submission to the UNFCCC Secretariat in 2021, outlining the goal of 
reducing emissions by 30% below the Business As Usual (BAU) levels by 2030, contingent on international support.  
The review involved active participation from relevant government ministries at national and sub-national levels, 
and that of non-state actors, academic and research institutions, the private sector, civil society organizations, 
women groups, and development partners were. The updated NDC encompasses measurable mitigation and 
adaptation objectives in agriculture, energy, forestry, transport, and waste sectors.  However, it was not submitted 
to UNFCCC, and its implementation plan was also not developed, thus, the 2016 NDC is still authoritative.  
 
In 2022, Somalia's Federal Government reiterated its dedication to addressing climate change by establishing the 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MoECC).  One of the aims of the MoECC is to reinvigorate NDC actions 
11 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2022). Human Development Report 2022. 
10 International Monetary Fund (IMF). (2023). Somalia: 2023 Article IV Consultation Report. (https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/SOM) 
9 International Labour Organization (ILO). (2023). Somalia Labour Market Trends. (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/employment-promotion/lang--en/index.htm)
=== PAGE 49 ===
47 
and coordinate climate change discussions in Somalia. It has adopted a comprehensive approach, collaborating with 
various governmental departments, partners, and stakeholders to implement priority climate actions effectively. 
To effectively implement the NDC, the MoECC, in collaboration with the UNDP and FAO, has supported the collective 
process for the review of the existing NDC to align it with the recently developed national reports such as the 
"Acceleration and Localization of Environmentally Sustainable Development Goals (Green SDGs) for Somalia" and to 
develop the NDC implementation roadmap in 2023, which has detailed sectoral strategies, including resource 
allocation 
 (b)         Specific information applicable to Parties, 
including 
regional 
economic 
integration 
organizations and their member States, that have 
reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 
4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including 
the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms 
of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, 
paragraphs 16– 18, of the Paris Agreement. 
Governance of the NDC Implementation  
 
Governance is at the heart of successful NDC implementation. This involves the establishment of robust institutional 
arrangements, clear policy directives, and inclusive processes that ensure stakeholder engagement at all levels. In its 
National Climate Change Policy (2020), Somalia has laid out a comprehensive governance structure that includes the 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MoECC), Federal Member State Governments, Sectoral Ministries, the 
National Climate Change Committee, the Cross-Sectoral Committee on Climate Change, the Centre for Climate 
Change Research, and non-state actors.  
 
The MoECC, established in August 2022, is at the helm of climate policy coordination and guidance, replacing the 
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change. This Ministry is pivotal in setting strategies for natural resource 
management, budget allocation for climate change awareness, and coordination of federal and state actions. 
Federal member states, with their respective environmental ministries, are responsible for local environmental 
governance, which is crucial for the decentralized implementation of NDCs. 
 
The interplay between the MoECC and federal member states is critical. Federal member states are tasked with 
translating national climate policies into actionable regional strategies that are sensitive to local contexts. This 
decentralized approach is intended to ensure that NDC implementation is not only top-down, but also bottom-up, 
reflecting the specific needs of each federal member state. 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MoECC), federal member states, and other stakeholders must 
adopt a unified communication protocol to facilitate regular exchanges and create a shared digital repository for 
climate data and policy development. The creation of joint coordination bodies is also essential, as it provides a 
forum for representatives from various sectors to engage in collaborative decision-making and policy 
implementation. These bodies must operate with clearly defined mandates to ensure that decisions are uniformly 
applied across all governance levels. 
 
At the international level, Somalia is a member of the African Union (AU), it is also signatory to its framework of 
climate change and renewable energy policies which hinge upon the continent's blueprint for socioeconomic
=== PAGE 50 ===
48 
transformation, Agenda 2063. It comprises the Committee of African Heads of State and Government on Climate 
Change is (CAHOSCC), AU Climate Change and Resilient Development Strategy and Action Plan (2022-2032); the 
Africa Adaptation Initiative (AAI); and the African Forest and Landscape Restoration Initiative (AFR100), amongst 
others.  The country has recently joined the Climate Vulnerable Forum and the V20 Group of Finance Ministers 
(CVF-V20), joining the community of 74 CVF-V20 member countries. As a member, Somalia will engage in efforts to 
transform climate vulnerability into climate prosperity, aligning with the shared vision of resilient, low-carbon 
development.  
 
Somalia joined the East Africa Community in 2024 as a full member and is also a member of the Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development (IGAD) at the regional level.  Under these regional cooperation bodies, Somalia 
subscribes to their policy frameworks on climate change and related environmental and natural resources treaties, 
conventions and agreements.    All these are consequential in guiding Somalia’s response to climate change and are 
the framework upon which this NDC is contingent. 
 
 
 
 
(c)           
How the Party’s preparation of its 
nationally determined contribution has been 
informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, 
in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the 
Paris Agreement; 
The MoECC, in collaboration with the UNDP and FAO, has supported the collective process for the review of the 
existing NDC to align it with the recently developed national reports such as the "Acceleration and Localization of 
Environmentally Sustainable Development Goals (Green SDGs) for Somalia" and to develop the NDC implementation 
roadmap in 2023, which has detailed sectoral strategies, including resource allocation.  In coordination with the NDC 
Partnership and financial support from UNDP, Somalia undertook a national stock take to evaluate the extent to 
which Somalia advanced towards the implementation of the previous NDC. The stock take assessed achievement of 
targets in priority sectors in the previous NDC, barriers and gaps in the NDC implementation and opportunities for 
increasing ambition on adaptation and mitigation in NDC 3.0 
(d)            Each Party with a nationally determined 
contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement 
that consists of adaptation action and/or economic 
diversification 
plans 
resulting 
in 
mitigation 
co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, 
of the Paris Agreement to submit information on:
=== PAGE 51 ===
49 
i. 
How the economic and social 
consequences of response 
measures have been considered 
in developing the nationally 
determined contribution;  
One of the most pressing challenges in implementing NDC 1.0 was the lack of adequate financial resources. 
Somalia’s estimated annual climate finance needs far exceeded the available funding, creating a gap between 
commitments and actual implementation. Although international mechanisms such as the Green Climate Fund 
(GCF) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) provided some financial support (USD50 million), disbursements 
were slow and insufficient to meet the country’s climate investment requirements.  The total resources mobilized 
for implementation of NDC 1.0 was USD 300 million. 
 
Attracting private sector investment in green projects proved difficult due to Somalia’s fragile economy and high 
investment risks. Many investors were reluctant to fund large-scale renewable energy projects or climate adaptation 
initiatives due to uncertainties surrounding Somalia’s regulatory framework and security situation. 
 
To finance NDC 3.0 Somalia will leverage a combination of public and private financing mechanisms, international 
climate funds, and innovative funding models to meeting its climate commitments. The integration of climate 
finance into national economic planning, improved transparency in fund allocation, and fostering partnerships 
between the government, private sector, and international donors are key components of a robust financing 
strategy that will be adopted 
ii. 
Specific projects, measures and 
activities to be implemented to 
contribute 
to 
mitigation 
co-benefits, 
including 
information on adaptation plans 
that 
also 
yield 
mitigation 
co-benefits, which may cover, 
but are not limited to, key 
sectors, 
such 
as 
energy, 
resources, 
water 
resources, 
coastal 
resources, 
human 
settlements and urban planning, 
agriculture and forestry; and 
economic diversification actions, 
which may cover, but are not 
limited to, sectors such as 
manufacturing 
and 
industry, 
energy and mining, transport 
and 
communication, 
Somalia has established a NDC Investment and Implementation Plan with comprehensive projects, measures and 
activities for each of the mitigation and adaptation measures.  
 
A comprehensive assessment of the financial needs for implementing Somalia’s NDC 3.0 was performed by 
analysing investment trends, existing financing gaps, and potential funding sources.  
 
The assessment report highlights the role of public-private partnerships, donor support, and innovative financial 
mechanisms in bridging these gaps. The report also explores financing strategies and mechanisms that can enhance 
Somalia’s capacity to meet its climate commitments. 
 
The specific adaptation actions and attendant co-benefits are detailed in the Draft Somalia National Adaptation Plan 
Framework 2024.
=== PAGE 52 ===
50 
construction, 
tourism, 
real 
estate, agriculture and fisheries 
5. Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, 
removals:  
(a)        
Assumptions and methodological 
approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic 
greenhouse 
gas 
emissions 
and 
removals 
corresponding to the Party’s nationally determined 
contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, 
paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by 
the CMA;  
Sectors covered under the GHG inventory are as follows: 
- 
Energy  
o Electricity generation - more than 90% of Somalia’s electricity is provided by Independent Power 
Producers (IPPs), primarily using diesel generators. Some companies are investing in hybrid 
solar-diesel mini-grids in urban areas.  
o Transport and IPPU, estimated based on fuel imports and proportions used in electricity 
generation, transport and IPPU  
- 
Agriculture, Forestry, Land Use, and Land-Use Change (AFOLLU). Activities under this sector assessed 
include afforestation and reforestation, deforestation, forest management, cropland management and 
grazing land management. Activity levels are mainly from the FAO periodic assessments  
- 
Fugitive emissions from fuels – from fridges and air conditioning.  
- 
Waste   
Targeted GHG  
- 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
- 
Methane (CH4) 
- 
Nitrous oxide (N2O) 
- 
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)  
Factors used are IPCC 2006 Tier 1 guidelines   
 
(b)          
Assumptions and methodological 
approaches 
used 
for 
accounting 
for 
the 
implementation of policies and measures or 
strategies 
in 
the 
nationally 
determined 
contribution; 
Not applicable. 
(c)    If applicable, information on how the Party 
will take into account existing methods and 
guidance under the Convention to account for 
anthropogenic 
emissions 
and 
removals, 
in 
accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the 
Paris Agreement, as appropriate;  
Methodologies and guidance provided by IPCC 2006 guidelines, including use of IPCC Inventory software Version 
2.95 for GHG inventory 
 
More details in 5(d)
=== PAGE 53 ===
51 
(d)      
IPCC methodologies and metrics used for 
estimating 
anthropogenic 
greenhouse 
gas 
emissions and removals;  
Methods of estimation  
Somalia’s accounts for emissions and removals are in accordance with methodologies and common metrics 
assessed by the IPCC 2006 Guidelines and adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the 
Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).  
 
The metrics used for GHG emissions and removals (CO2 equivalent) are the Global Warming Potentials of a 100-year 
time horizon which are presented in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.  
These methods of estimation are subject to change depending on the progress of future international negotiations 
on estimating and accounting rules.  
 
The contributions from the LULUCF sector are accounted for based on the activity-based approach described in the 
2013 Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol, with the 
estimated GHG emissions and removals from the LULUCF sector in accordance with the IPCC guidelines mentioned 
above. 
 
Somalia revises its total net emissions and removals estimates annually to incorporate new data, improved methods 
and changes to international guidelines 
(e) 
Sector-, 
category- 
or 
activity-specific 
assumptions, 
methodologies 
and 
approaches 
consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, 
including, as applicable:  
i. 
Approach 
to 
addressing 
emissions 
and 
subsequent 
removals 
from 
natural 
disturbances on managed lands;  
Methodologies addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands are not 
applied 
ii. 
Approach used to account for 
emissions and removals from 
harvested wood products.  
iii. 
Approach used to address the 
effects of age-class structure in 
forests; 
Methodologies addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands are not 
applied
=== PAGE 54 ===
52 
(f) 
Other 
assumptions 
and 
methodological 
approaches used for understanding the nationally 
determined 
contribution 
and, 
if 
applicable, 
estimating corresponding emissions and removals, 
including:  
i. 
How the reference indicators, baseline(s) 
and/or reference level(s), including, where 
applicable, 
sector-, 
category- 
or 
activity-specific 
reference 
levels, 
are 
constructed, including, for example, key 
parameters, 
assumptions, 
definitions, 
methodologies, data sources and models 
used;  
The GHG mitigation measures and projections presented for Somalia were developed using a multi-step, 
participatory and data-driven methodology, combining national priorities, regional insights, and internationally 
accepted modelling frameworks as detailed below: 
 
The GHG mitigation plan followed a comprehensive, participatory, and evidence-based methodology. Broad 
stakeholder consultations were conducted involving government ministries, regional authorities, development 
partners, private sector actors, and civil society organizations. The engagements ensured that the identified 
mitigation measures were context-specific, feasible, and aligned with Somalia’s development needs. Stakeholders 
emphasized the importance of low-cost, scalable solutions, particularly in agriculture, land use, and energy, 
alongside the need for capacity building and technology transfer. Their input was instrumental in prioritizing actions 
and validating proposed interventions. 
 
The process also included a detailed review of existing national frameworks, particularly the National Adaptation 
Plan (NAP), progress on the first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC 1.0), and sector-specific policies in 
agriculture, forestry, energy, and transport. This review ensured alignment with national climate commitments and 
development priorities under Somalia’sNTP). Additionally, comparisons were made with similar countries in the 
region—such as Ethiopia, Kenya, and Sudan—to benchmark feasible mitigation actions based on shared ecological 
conditions and economic realities, thereby reinforcing the credibility and relevance of the plan. 
 
To quantify emissions and assess the impact of proposed mitigation measures, a combination of modeling tools was 
used. The Low Emissions Analysis Platform (LEAP) was applied for energy and emissions scenario modelling through 
2035; Marginal Cost Abatement Curves (MACCs) were used to identify the most cost-effective measures to reduce 
emissions by ranking various abatement options based on their cost per ton of CO2e reduced, while Excel-based 
tools were utilized for aggregating sectoral data and estimating the costs of mitigation actions. For national GHG 
inventory development and future emissions projections, the IPCC 2006 software and Tier 1 emission factors were 
used, drawing on available national and regional activity data. This multi-tool approach provided robust, transparent 
estimates of Somalia’s emission pathways under both business-as-usual and mitigation scenarios, supporting the 
formulation of realistic and measurable emission reduction targets. 
 
ii. 
For Parties with nationally determined 
contributions 
that 
contain 
non- 
greenhouse-gas components, information 
on 
assumptions 
and 
methodological 
approaches used in relation to those 
components, as applicable;  
Not Applicable
=== PAGE 55 ===
53 
iii. 
For climate forcers included in nationally 
determined contributions not covered by 
IPCC guidelines, information on how the 
climate forcers are estimated;  
Not Applicable 
iv. 
Further 
technical 
information, 
as 
necessary;  
Not Applicable 
(g)      The intention to use voluntary cooperation 
under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if 
applicable 
Somalia in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted in 2021 expressed its intention to engage in 
voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement.  
 
Somalia outlined plans to utilize market-based mechanisms to achieve its climate goals. Specifically, the NDC stated 
that Somalia aims to "explore the use of international carbon markets under Article 6 to support the 
implementation of its mitigation and adaptation actions." 
 
In NDC3.0, the above statement still stands as the country will consider engaging in Article 6 mechanisms in the 
future to enhance its climate action and sustainable development efforts. 
6. How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:  
(a)    How the Party considers that its nationally 
determined contribution is fair and ambitious in 
the light of its national circumstances;  
Somalia, a least-developed country, faces significant challenges in accessing international development assistance, 
which limits its ability to finance mitigation and adaptation measures.  
 
As a result, the country’s mitigation contribution takes the form of both conditional and unconditional reduction in 
GHG emissions relative to a business-as-usual (BAU) emissions baseline over the period 2025 to 2035. Total emission 
reduction target is 34%, with 29% under conditional reduction while 5% under unconditional 
 
(b)    Fairness considerations, including reflecting 
on equity; 
Somalia has contributed minimally to global emissions but faces disproportionate climate impacts, including 
droughts, floods, and desertification. There is need for increased financial, technical, and capacity-building support 
from developed countries to enable Somalia’s just transition and resilience-building efforts. 
 
Voluntary cooperation under Article 6 (carbon markets, non-market approaches) could provide Somalia with 
opportunities for fair participation in global climate action while ensuring benefits flow to local communities. 
 
(c)     
How the Party has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement; 
The country has a fragile economy, with 69% of the population living below the poverty line, indicating severe 
financial limitations (AfDB, 2023). Historical Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Somalia is less than $500 million 
annually, showing that securing billions in international finance is extremely difficult (IMF, 2023).
=== PAGE 56 ===
54 
Somalia remains committed to strengthening its climate action while acknowledging the country's unique 
vulnerabilities, socio-economic constraints, and adaptation needs. It aims to demonstrate progression in its 
mitigation efforts from 30% emission reduction in NDC 1 submitted in 2021 to 34% total emission reduction target, 
with 29% under conditional reduction and 5% under unconditional. 
 
Despite facing significant institutional, financial, and technical challenges, Somalia is committed to implementing 
robust mitigation actions across key sectors such as energy, agriculture, forestry, transport, and waste management. 
Enhancing governance structures, mobilizing climate finance, and strengthening capacity-building efforts will be 
essential in meeting these targets. 
 
d)    
How the Party has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement; 
Given Somalia’s emerging economy, fragile context and limited emissions, the country will not adopt a full 
economy-wide emissions target, but will prioritize key emitting sectors such as energy, agriculture, forestry, and 
waste management but gradually expand its mitigation scope beyond these sectoral targets for progressive 
mitigation efforts.  
 
The country will develop emission tracking frameworks to improve data collection for all key sectors, supporting a 
transition to broader reduction goals in future NDC updates. 
(e)    
How the Party has addressed Article 4, 
paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement 
As an LDC, Somalia will leverage flexibility provisions by tailoring its NDC commitments to available resources, 
institutional capacity, and socio-economic conditions. Given Somalia’s high vulnerability to climate change, 
adaptation efforts will be central to the NDC (estimated cost of achieving emission reductions US$5.170 billion while 
significantly higher requirement with climate adaptation estimated at around US$6.330 billion). The country will 
emphasize gradual progression in its mitigation and adaptation actions, ensuring that commitments align with 
national development priorities 
 
To achieve these targets as outlined in NDC 3.0 Investment and Implementation Plan, Somalia will actively engage 
with climate finance mechanisms to secure resources for implementing its climate commitments; prioritize technical 
and institutional capacity-building to enhance climate governance, monitoring, and implementation; seek 
international support for knowledge transfer, climate data collection, and policy development to ensure effective 
NDC execution; and collaborate with development partners to access technology transfer and capacity-building 
initiatives, among others. 
7. How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2: 
(a)         
How the nationally determined 
contribution contributes towards achieving the 
objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 
2;  
To achieve Article 2 of the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement objective of stabilizing GHG emissions, Somalia 
commits to a 34% reduction in GHG emissions (29% conditional, 5% unconditional) relative to Business-as-Usual 
(BAU) by 2035, supporting the global effort to limit temperature rise.
=== PAGE 57 ===
55 
This is with a focus on mitigation co-benefits under Annex 3(d) and priority adaptation and mitigation sectors, with 
their respective cost estimates under the section on Financing adaptation and mitigation priorities (2025-2035). 
(b)           
How the nationally determined 
contribution 
contributes 
towards 
Article 
2, 
paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the 
Paris Agreement. 
Somalia’s NDC 3.0 supports Article 2, Paragraph 1(a) of the Paris Agreement as stated in 7 (a), while Article 4, 
paragraph 1 by adopting a progressive approach to emission reductions, prioritizing key sectors such as energy, 
agriculture, forestry, and waste management.
=== PAGE 58 ===
and Distribution oftq
nt(and Stdte of Somalia
follftee}l€Nberg7
