=== PAGE 1 ===
Somalia’s National Adaptation 
Plan (NAP) Framework
February 2022
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change (DoECC), 
Office of the Prime Minister
=== PAGE 2 ===
© Federal Government of Somalia, 2022
All rights for commercial/for profit reproduction or translation, in any form, reserved.
Original text: English
Cover photo: UN Photo/Stuart Price (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework was prepared with assistance from the NAP 
Global Network via financial support from the Government of Canada. 
The NAP Global Network was created in 2014 to support developing countries in advancing their 
NAP processes, and help accelerate adaptation efforts around the world. To achieve this, the 
Network facilitates South-South peer learning and exchange, supports national-level action on NAP 
formulation and implementation, and generates, synthesizes, and shares knowledge. The Network’s 
members include individual participants from more than 155 countries involved in developing and 
implementing National Adaptation Plans, as well as 12 donor members. Financial support for the 
Network has been provided by Austria, Canada, Germany, Ireland, the United Kingdom and the 
United States. The Secretariat is hosted by the International Institute for Sustainable Development 
(IISD). For more information, visit www.napglobalnetwork.org.
This project is undertaken with the ﬁnancial support of:
Ce projet a été réalisé avec l’appui ﬁnancier de :
Secretariat hosted by:
Secrétariat hébergé par :
=== PAGE 3 ===
iii
Title
Acknowledgements
This NAP Framework has been developed to guide and advance Somalia’s NAP process in a 
way that addresses and aligns the medium- and long-term adaptation needs of the country 
in a coherent and coordinated manner. Through this process, guided by the vision, objectives, 
principles and coherent next steps of the NAP Framework, the country will aim to maximize 
the benefits of the recently launched NAP Readiness Project and other adaptation efforts to 
increase Somalia’s resilience. 
A wide range of individuals and institutions have participated in the development of this 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework and I would like to recognize their efforts. These 
include representatives from relevant federal government institutions, federal member states, 
civil society, academia, the private sector and development partners. 
The Federal Directorate of Environment and Climate Change is grateful to all stakeholders 
who have provided inputs and comments to shape the country’s NAP process. We are 
grateful to the NAP Global Network support team, hosted by the International Institute for 
Sustainable Development (IISD), for the financial and technical support in the development of 
the NAP Framework, and in particular would like to thank Fatuma Hussein, whose insights and 
contributions were invaluable. We are also thankful to UNDP, UNEP and all other development 
partners supporting the country’s NAP Process, and we call upon all stakeholders and partners 
to support the implementation of the country’s NAP. 
Let’s all work together in delivering the vision of the NAP for strategic, coherent and 
coordinated interventions on climate action, and for the prosperity and resilience of our people 
and great country. 
Ahmed Yussuf Ahmed
Director General, Directorate of Environment and Climate Change (DoECC), Somalia
=== PAGE 4 ===
iv
Title
Foreword 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to climate change and variability. Climate change effects, 
including frequent and intense droughts and floods, are wreaking havoc on the already fragile 
country. Without effective and well-coordinated response measures, these effects are likely to 
exacerbate existing vulnerabilities and reduce the people’s livelihood options, which in turn may 
have negative impacts for stability and security in Somalia (Coning et al, 2021). This situation is 
likely to worsen, as confirmed by the latest scientific reports from the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC).
The Federal Government of Somalia and the country’s federal member states have taken 
various measures to respond to the effects of climate change. The National Development Plan 
(NDP-9) for 2020–2024 recognizes the threats that climate change poses to the country’s 
development objectives and mainstreams climate change into the strategic interventions 
planned for all vulnerable sectors of the economy to enhance resilience. Somalia has also 
recently developed a National Climate Change Policy (2020) which offers further direction, 
particularly on adaptation measures, social development and the mitigation of climate change 
impacts, and which calls for mainstreaming climate change into the federal government, state, 
regions and districts, as well as into local-level planning processes. In addition, the National 
Disaster Management Policy aims to strengthen community resilience and preparedness 
for disasters and emergencies. The country has also set up a Directorate of Environment 
and Climate Change to coordinate and lead all matters relating to climate change in the 
country. However, despite these steps, the country continues to face numerous gaps in policy, 
institutional and financial capacities to effectively respond to climate change. 
The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process provides for a strategic approach by which the 
Federal Government of Somalia can address climate change impacts in a more integrated and 
coordinated way. The development of this NAP Framework is a milestone in the NAP process as 
it will guide the development, coordination and implementation of policies, plans and strategies 
that will help the country address its medium- and long-term adaptation needs, while aligning 
these actions with the country’s development and its continued progress toward peace and 
stability. The Framework promotes adaptation integration, alignment with development and 
peacebuilding processes, inclusivity, transparency, good governance, institutional building and 
gender-responsiveness in Somalia’s NAP process. 
I hope that this Framework will guide our collective climate change adaptation agenda for a 
prosperous and more climate-resilient Somalia. 
H.E. Mahdi Mohammed Gulaid
Deputy Prime Minister, Federal Government of Somalia
=== PAGE 5 ===
v
Title
Executive Summary
Somalia is considered among the world’s most vulnerable countries to climate change. This 
vulnerability stems from a combination of political, socioeconomic and geographic conditions. 
The country has faced protracted conflicts in the last three decades leading to the collapse of 
governance systems, massive environmental degradation and a high prevalence of poverty. The 
country is also considered among the poorest countries of the world. Some 80 per cent of its 
territory is arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs), and highly climate-dependent livestock production 
and agriculture account for 70 per cent of the country’s livelihood. Recurrent extended droughts 
and intermittent floods continue to undermine the resilience of the economy’s most vulnerable 
sectors, including the agriculture, livestock, water, forestry, health and energy sectors. 
In response to the challenges posed by climate change, the government of Somalia has 
integrated climate change into its National Development Plan for the period of 2020 to 2024 
and has developed a number of other climate-change-related programs and policies, such as 
the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 2013 and the National Climate Change 
Policy (2020). Additionally, and consistent with UNFCCC decisions and guidelines, Somalia is 
updating its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). The country has also recently initiated 
its National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process through the implementation of Green Climate 
Fund (GCF)-financed NAP Readiness Project, with which it hopes to strengthen capacities and 
coordination for climate change adaptation planning and implementation in Somalia. 
The purpose of this NAP Framework is to guide Somalia in developing, coordinating and 
implementing various policies, plans and strategies, as well as legislation, that will help the 
country address its medium- and long-term adaptation needs, while aligning these actions 
with the country’s development and continued progress toward peace and stability. Specifically, 
the objectives of the NAP Framework will be to clarify the approach, vision, guiding principles, 
institutional framework and key themes for the Somalia NAP process. The framework aims 
to align the NAP process with existing policies and strategies, including those regarding 
peacebuilding, conflict and gender equality, and with adaptation research. The Framework 
also aims to ensure that the NAP process does not contribute to the proliferation of planning 
processes and related documents, but rather helps to build the momentum needed for its NAP 
process and position the country to maximize the expected benefits of the GCF funding.
The report was informed by a detailed desk review of various relevant documents, plans 
and policies as well as international publications. Additionally, under the guidance of the 
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change (DoECC), the framework was informed by 
extensive stakeholder consultations both at the Federal and Member State levels. This includes 
government representatives at both levels, private sector actors, international organizations, 
civil society and academia.
=== PAGE 6 ===
vi
Title
Mandated by Somalia’s development agenda and Climate Change Policy (2020), the overall 
goal of the Somalia NAP process is to reduce national and local vulnerabilities to the impacts 
of climate change and build resilience of the country and its communities. Specifically, the NAP 
process will aim to: 
•	 define medium- and long-term climate adaptation actions and initiatives for 
implementation; 
•	 facilitate the integration of climate change adaptation, in a coherent manner, into 
development planning processes and strategies; 
•	 enhance coordination; and 
•	 promote the mobilization of resources to respond to climate change adaptation needs of 
Somalia. 
The NAP process will be coordinated by Directorate of Environment and Climate Change 
(DoECC) in the Office of the Prime Minister. The DoECC will develop and implement the NAP 
using the coordination structures in place for both at technical and high level decision-making, 
all with the participation of federal government, federal member states, private sector actors, 
international partners, and civil society organizations. 
Key themes for Somalia’s NAP process will include enhancing vertical integration, aligning 
the NAP with Somalia’s National Development Plans and Somalia’s peacebuilding agenda, 
instituting a whole-of-society approach, prioritizing resource mobilization for implementation, 
ensuring good governance, and enhancing community-based adaptation. Key principles for the 
NAP process will include ensuring that the NAP avoids duplication and is: 
•	 country-driven and country-owned; 
•	 aligned with national development and peacebuilding efforts; 
•	 gender-responsive; 
•	 conflict-sensitive; 
•	 participatory, inclusive and transparent; 
•	 guided by the best available scientific information, including traditional and Indigenous 
knowledge; 
•	 coordinated.
The country’s fragile security situation, weak institutional and coordination arrangements, 
and inadequate technical, technological and financial capacities remain the key impediments 
to Somalia’s NAP Process. Enhanced support, capacity development, partnerships and 
investment are required to realize the NAP vision. The NAP Framework identifies key elements 
for financing the NAP process, including increasing resource mobilization from bilateral and 
multilateral sources, enhancing private-sector engagement and investment in climate action, 
and establishing a climate change fund to support adaptation actions in Somalia. Furthermore, 
an effective monitoring and evaluation system for adaptation is a key component in the NAP 
process. The NAP Readiness Project can play an instrumental role towards laying down a firm 
basis for Somalia’s NAP process in line with this Framework.
=== PAGE 7 ===
vii
Title
Table of Contents
1.0 Introduction......................................................................................................................................................................... 1
1.1 Background............................................................................................................................................................................................1
1.2 Current and Future Climate Change Trends...............................................................................................................3
1.3 Objectives of the NAP Framework ....................................................................................................................................5
1.4 Methodology.........................................................................................................................................................................................6
2.0 Somalia’s National Adaptation Plan Process.....................................................................................................8
2.1 Overview of the National Adaptation Plan Process ............................................................................................8
2.2 Goals of the NAP Process..........................................................................................................................................................8
2.3 Mandate for the NAP Process................................................................................................................................................9
2.4 Status of the NAP Process in Somalia .......................................................................................................................10
3.0 Linking the Nap Process to the Broader Policy Context ...........................................................................11
3.1 Relevant Policy and Regulatory Frameworks and the Somalia NAP Process ...............................11
3.3 GCF Readiness Proposal and Somalia NAP Process.........................................................................................17
3.4 Linkage to Peacebuilding Initiatives .............................................................................................................................18
3.5 Linkage with COVID-19 Preparedness and Response Plan .......................................................................19
3.6 Added Value of the NAP Process in Relation to These Other Policy Documents......................19
4.0 Approaches and Structure for the Nap Process ...........................................................................................21
4.1 Context ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 21
4.2 Specific Themes for the Somalia NAP Process.................................................................................................... 21
4.3 Proposed Institutional Arrangements for the Somalia NAP Process..................................................24
5.0 Guiding Principles for the NAP Process..............................................................................................................29
Principle 1: Country-Driven and Country-Owned Process...................................................................................29
Principle 2: Linkages with National Development and Peacebuilding Efforts .....................................29
Principle 3: Gender-Responsiveness.......................................................................................................................................29
Principle 4: Conflict-Sensitive....................................................................................................................................................30
Principle 5: Participatory, Inclusive and Transparent................................................................................................30
Principle 6: Guided by the Best Available Scientific Information and Traditional Knowledge.31
Principle 7: Coordination and Avoiding Duplication................................................................................................... 31
6.0 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning..................................................................................................................32
6.1 Establishment of an Online National Adaptation Monitoring and Evaluation System .......32
6.2 Selection of Suitable Indicators .......................................................................................................................................33
6.3 Effective Climate Adaptation Coordination Structures ..............................................................................33
6.4 Process for regular reporting and guidelines..........................................................................................................33
7.0 Climate Finance Resource Mobilization.............................................................................................................. 34
8.0 Next Steps and Milestones........................................................................................................................................36
References ................................................................................................................................................................................41
=== PAGE 8 ===
viii
Title
Acronyms
CSCC	
Cross-Sectoral Committee on Climate Change
DINA 	
Drought Impact and Needs Assessment
DoECC	
Directorate of Environment and Climate Change
DG	
Director General
FAO	
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GCF	
Green Climate Fund 
IDP	
internally displaced persons
INC	
Initial National Communication to the UN Climate Convention
INDC	
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
IPCC	
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
LDC	
least-developed country 
MoPIED	
Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development
MoF	
Ministry of Finance
NAP	
National Adaptation Plan
NAPA	
National Adaptation Programme of Action
NCCC	
National Climate Change Committee 
NCCP	
National Climate Change Policy
NDC	
Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement
NDP	
National Development Plan
NGO	
non-governmental organization
UN’s SDGs	
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals
UNDP	
United Nations Development Programme
UNFCCC	
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
=== PAGE 9 ===
ix
Title
Glossary
Adaptation: Adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic 
stimuli or their effects which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities (UNFCCC, 
n.d.c). 
Climate change: Change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural 
climate variability observed over comparable time periods (UNFCC, 1992).
Climate finance: Local, national or international financing—drawn from public, private and 
alternative sources of financing—that seeks to support mitigation and adaptation actions 
that will address climate change (UNFCC, n.d.a).
Gender: Roles, responsibilities, values and attitudes ascribed to women, men, boys and girls by 
a given society at a given place and at a given time. Gender is socially constructed, which 
means that a given society defines these roles, responsibilities, values and attitudes; they 
are learned, can change, and are not natural (UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia, 2017).
Gender mainstreaming: The process of assessing the implications for women and men of any 
planned action, including legislation, policies and programs, in all areas and at all levels. 
It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s concerns and experiences an integral 
dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies and 
programs in all political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men benefit 
equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to achieve gender equality 
(UN Social and Economic Council, 1992).
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs): National climate plans highlighting climate 
actions, including climate-related targets, policies and measures that governments aim 
to implement in response to climate change and as a contribution to global climate action 
under the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, n.d.b).
National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process: A strategic, iterative process that helps countries 
conduct comprehensive medium- and long-term climate adaptation planning. It is a flexible 
process that builds on the country’s existing adaptation activities and helps integrate 
climate change into national decision-making (Hammill et al, 2019).
Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse 
effects of climate change, including climate variability. Vulnerability is a function of the 
character, magnitude, and rate of climate change and variation to which a system is 
exposed, its sensitivity and its adaptive capacity (Parry et al, 2007).
=== PAGE 10 ===
1
Title
1.1 Background
Somalia is one of the states in Africa with extreme vulnerability to climate change and 
variability. Somalia’s arid and semiarid lands make up more than 80 per cent of the country’s 
landmass and are characteristically prone to extreme weather conditions, including high mean 
surface temperatures, periods of extended drought, highly erratic rainfall and strong winds. 
The country’s economy is dependent on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, water, 
energy, wildlife and health, and climate change increases these sectors’ vulnerability. Climate 
impacts, including those from droughts and floods, multiply existing threats to the attainment 
of food and water security, productive livelihoods, health and human development capabilities 
for the people of Somalia. For example, livestock and agriculture, which is the main livelihood 
base, with more than half of the population primarily engaged in pastoralism, agropastoralism 
and subsistence agriculture is significantly affected by climate change(World Bank & FAO, 
2018). Furthermore, in recent times, unpredictable rainfall patterns, increasing temperatures 
and natural disasters (mainly droughts and flash floods) have caused decreased production and 
productivity in these sectors. This compounds an already difficult context: Somalia is already 
considered a least-developed country (LDC), with nearly 69 per cent of its population living 
below the international poverty line (Federal Government of Somalia, 2020b). 
Somalia’s climate vulnerabilities are underpinned by the country’s prolonged conflict, insecurity, 
institutional collapse and weak governance and capacity. Furthermore, gender and social 
inequalities remain serious concerns. 
Somalia has experienced over two decades of civil conflict, terrorism and instability, with the 
result that the government has limited capacities, resources and institutions to effectively 
respond to the current and forecasted impacts of climate change. Climate impacts, in turn, 
exacerbate conflicts over natural resources and increase the challenges posed by large numbers 
of internally displaced persons. 
Deep cycles of internal conflicts emerging as a result of the collapse of the Siad Barre 
government in January 1991 have undermined legitimate institutions and deepened levels of 
fragmentation. Following a fragile, but positive, transition to peace in mid-2012, Somalia has 
a full federal government in Mogadishu committed to inclusiveness, reconciliation and peace, 
based on a provisional constitution. Furthermore, the federal government, with support from 
its partners, has established regional governments officially consisting of six federal member 
states: Somaliland, Puntland, Jubaland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Southwest and Banadir Regional 
Administration(special region).
1.0 Introduction
=== PAGE 11 ===
2
Title
Climate change impacts women, men, boys and girls differently, often to the detriment 
of women and other vulnerable groups, and existing gender inequalities are likely to be 
exacerbated by climate change (Huyer, 2016). According to Somalia’s National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) (Federal Government of Somalia, 2013), women and youth 
are particularly vulnerable to climate change. For women, their role as primary caregivers 
and providers of food and fuel makes them more vulnerable when flooding and droughts 
occur. Drought compromises the hygiene of girls and women, as the little available water is 
used for drinking and cooking. When nearby wells and water sources run dry, women—who 
are overwhelmingly responsible for the provision of household water—have to travel longer 
distances in search of water. Longer dry seasons mean that women work harder to feed and 
care for their families. In both urban and rural areas, women have multiple demands in the 
home, workplace and community, which leaves them with less time for active participation 
in decision-making processes. Compounding these challenges, women in traditional Somali 
communities are subject to cultural beliefs that deny them equal opportunities and rights. At 
the same time, Somalia has a very young population, with over 80 per cent estimated to be 
under the age of 35; unfortunately, the unemployment rate remains stuck at approximately 70 
per cent (Federal Government of Somalia, 2020b). This makes women and youth more likely to 
experience poverty, making it difficult for them to cope with and recover from climate change 
impacts. 
The government is now faced with the challenge of rebuilding state institutions in the midst 
of recurrent and protracted conflict with the terrorist group al-Shabaab, a conflict which is 
now concentrated mainly in the South. The conflict has fragmented the country, destroyed 
legitimate institutions and created widespread vulnerability. Coupled with climate-related 
disasters, this has undermined investment in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure and 
social services, exacerbating the levels of poverty. In fact, the NDP recognizes climate change 
disasters and conflict as key root causes of poverty in Somalia that should be addressed.
In the last decade, Somalia has made great strides in terms of not only stability but also 
institutional building, including the establishment of political, social, environmental and 
economic systems that are showing great signs of progress, despite their continued fragility. 
The country is gradually transitioning from insecurity and emergencies towards peace 
and stability, paving the way for the development of long-term policies and strategies for 
achieving sustainable development. This progress presents an opportunity to align the National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP) process with the national development and peacebuilding efforts in the 
country to ensure that climate action supports Somalia’s peacebuilding objectives and that the 
shared drivers of both climate vulnerability and conflict start to be addressed. 
The 8th National Development Plan (NDP) (2017–2019) and the subsequent 9th NDP (2020–
2024) (Federal Government of Somalia, 2017 and 2020b) lay the foundation for plans and policy 
developments aimed at achieving socio-economic transformation by taking a sustainable 
and gender-sensitive approach. To address the climate change threat, the Somali government 
has developed a number of policies, including NAPA 2013, Somalia’s Resilience and Recovery 
Framework (RRF), the National Environment Policy and the National Climate Change Policy 
2020 (Federal Government of Somalia, 2013, 2018c, 2019d, 2020a). The National Adaptation 
Plan (NAP) process will now bring together Somalia’s adaptation and development agendas.
=== PAGE 12 ===
3
Title
The NAP process and the policies and frameworks that guide climate action in Somalia are 
complemented by a number of ongoing climate change adaptation projects. The Green Climate 
Fund (GCF)-financed National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Readiness Project, implemented through 
the UNDP, will play an important role in strengthening national and state-level capacity and 
coordination for climate change adaptation planning and implementation in Somalia. The 
project is expected to contribute towards the implementation of the country’s adaptation 
targets in the country’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and to be aligned with the 
National Development Plan-9. The NAP project implementation is in its early stages, and to help 
lay out a vision and approach to the NAP process, a NAP Framework is required. 
1.2 Current and Future Climate Change Trends
Somalia’s climate is generally tropical, hot and dry due to its geographical location near the 
equator. Somalia’s coastline, the longest in Africa, contributes to temperature variations 
between the south and north of the country. Much of the country is considered to be made 
up of arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs), characterized by scarce erratic rains and extreme 
temperatures. This has significant implications for both livestock and agricultural production, 
the main sources of livelihood for the majority of the population. 
Temperature
Somalia has experienced significant variations in its climate during the last century, evidenced 
by the country’s continuous uptick in its mean annual temperatures since 1991. In the last three 
decades, maximum temperature increases were experienced in much of Somalia. Projections 
indicate continued increases in average temperature in both the near and long term (Ogallo et 
al, 2018). 
The Greater Horn of Africa region will continue to warm throughout the 21st century, with an 
increase in temperature of 3.1 °C by 2100 (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014). 
Temperatures over Somalia are expected to increase at a rate of 0.3 to 0.5 °C per decade until 
2050. This means that the mean temperature is projected to increase between 3 °C and 4 °C by 
the end of the century. This will have significant implications for many critical sectors of Somalia’s 
economy, including water, agriculture, livestock, fisheries, health and infrastructure, among others.
Figure 1. Projected annual average temperature (2020–2076) 
Source: World Bank Climate Knowledge Portal—Somalia
=== PAGE 13 ===
4
Title
Among other things, these climate-change-related temperature variations increase the risks of 
faster breeding among disease-causing vectors and pests. Locusts, for example, have ravaged 
Somalia’s vegetation over the past two years, destroying key crops such as sorghum and maize. 
Climate change is also one of the main factors that can cause the extinction of certain species. 
Climate change and the increased frequency of natural disasters have contributed to a mass 
migration of wildlife from Somalia to neighboring countries, while the influx of invasive species 
such as Prosopis juliflora, an evergreen shrub, has also constrained the productivity of both the 
livestock and wildlife sectors.
Rainfall
Somalia has an average annual rainfall of 250 mm, which fluctuates across the country. In the 
north, the conditions are very hot and arid, and the average annual rainfall is less than 200 
mm, while the south-west region gets the most rain in a year, around 500 mm. Some regions 
in Somalia receive less than 50 mm of precipitation per year (Federal Government of Somalia, 
2021a). During the Xagaa, or long dry season, which runs from June to September, some regions 
receive significantly less rainfall, resulting in drought incidences that often have a devasting 
impact on livelihoods. The Gu season, characterized by long rains, usually occurs from April to 
June, and is expected to feature increased flood incidences. The season’s peak occurs from April 
to May. 
Somalia’s annual rainfall is expected to increase within the next couple of decades, with mean 
annual rainfall increasing by one per cent by 2030. Also, the seasonal rainfall variability over 
the country will increase; this growing unpredictability will further affect major sectors such as 
agriculture, livestock, fisheries, health and infrastructure, among others.
The El Niño and La Niña phases of the El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon1 are 
closely linked to precipitation in East Africa. While the former can trigger flooding and drought, 
the latter can trigger strong winds and cause more droughts (Eklöw & Krampe, 2019). As such, 
Somalia is affected by both, and the effects can be devastating. 
Somalia has witnessed increased cases of droughts and floods in the last few decades. In 1992, 
a severe famine resulted in the death of 300,000 people (Federal Government of Somalia, 
2018b).A pattern has emerged in the last two decades, with drought typically occurring every 
three years; this includes the 2011 drought that resulted in the death of 250,000 people, the 
majority of them women and children. Increased flooding has also been experienced, including 
the 1997–1998 El Niño floods and the more recent flash floods in Belet-Weyne, Central Somalia, 
which killed more than 20 people while displacing nearly half of the region’s population (Federal 
Government of Somalia, 2018b).
1  A recurring climate pattern involving changes in the temperature of waters in the central and eastern tropical Pacific 
Ocean (https://www.weather.gov/mhx/ensowhat).
=== PAGE 14 ===
5
Title
Figure 2. Average rainfall distribution for each season 
Source: Federal Government of Somalia, 2021
1.3 Objectives of the NAP Framework 
This National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Framework is designed to help guide the government of 
Somalia in developing, coordinating and implementing the various policies, plans, strategies 
and legislation that will help the country address its medium- and long-term adaptation needs, 
while aligning these actions with the country’s development and continued progress toward 
peace and stability. 
Specifically, the objectives of the NAP Framework are to: 
•	 Clarify Somalia’s approach to its NAP process. This will include an articulation of the 
country’s vision of climate change adaptation, its adaptation objectives, the principles 
that will guide adaptation in Somalia, roles and responsibilities within the national 
government, and any priority actions to be undertaken. It will also provide a reference 
point for bringing together various adaptation planning efforts from different sectors and 
scales of decision-making.
=== PAGE 15 ===
6
Title
•	 Guide the government in formulating and implementing relevant policies and strategies 
that respond to medium- and long-term adaptation priorities. 
•	 Align the NAP process with existing policies and strategies , including those related to 
peacebuilding, conflict and gender equality, and with adaptation research. 
•	 Focus on specific themes that are particularly relevant or unique to the country’s context, 
including gender-responsive adaptation planning and implementation. 
The NAP Framework is designed to ensure that the NAP process in Somalia does not contribute 
to the proliferation of planning processes and related documents. It will not only help the 
government of Somalia build the momentum needed for its NAP process, as it initiates its Green 
Climate Fund (GCF) NAP Readiness Programme project, but will also help position the country 
to maximize the expected benefits coming from the GCF and other funding sources. 
1.4 Methodology 
The NAP Framework was developed under the direction and coordination of the Directorate of 
Environment and Climate Change (DoECC), which lies within the Office of the Prime Minister 
of the Federal Government of Somalia. The NAP Framework for Somalia takes into account the 
country’s sectoral vulnerabilities, the gender dimensions of climate change, the peacebuilding 
context and the impacts of climate change in Somalia. It builds on the ongoing work of NDC 
revision, the GCF NAP Readiness Project, and other relevant projects and programs. 
Below is an overview of the methodology used for the development of the Framework.
1) DESK REVIEW 
The NAP Framework was developed based on an extensive review of key climate-related 
documents, including (Federal Government of Somalia, 2020b, 2021a, A?, 2013, 2020a, 2018b, 
2018c, 2018d, GCF 2019): 
•	 The National Development Plan-9 
•	 The Nationally Determined Contribution – Adaptation Baseline 2020 
•	 National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 
•	 National Climate Change Policy 
•	 Drought Impact Needs Assessment; 
•	 Recovery and Resilience Framework 
•	 Somali National Disaster Management Policy 
•	 Somalia NAP GCF Readiness Proposal. 
This review was complemented by a review of the draft National Gender Policy (Federal 
Government of Somalia, 2018), the UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 
(2021–2025), national and UN peacebuilding reports, and sectoral and state policies and plans, 
among others. Other relevant international reports and reports from countries in the region were 
also reviewed.
=== PAGE 16 ===
7
Title
2) STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS 
Stakeholder consultations underpinned the whole NAP Framework development process. The 
lead consultant worked under DoECC and with support from a local consultant to undertake 
stakeholder consultations, including through FGDs, with the interviews providing inputs and 
informing the draft. Key stakeholders consulted included representatives from government, 
international partners, civil society and the private sector, with the interviews guided by a need 
to ensure inclusivity. Consultations were held with key stakeholders in the ministry responsible 
for the environment and climate change, as well as other relevant ministries such as the 
Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development, to develop a detailed outline for the NAP 
Framework. The draft NAP Framework was shared with stakeholders for feedback. Somalia’s 
NAP focal point provided a list of relevant actors to speak with. 
3) VALIDATION 
A validation workshop was organized to present the draft NAP Framework to relevant 
stakeholders and to gather feedback on the document. The validation meeting involved all key 
NAP process stakeholders, including government departments and institutions (federal and 
state), non-government organizations (local and international), private-sector representatives, 
researchers and academics. Comments and inputs from the validation meeting were 
incorporated into the draft, and a final and validated NAP Framework was submitted for final 
government review and approval.
=== PAGE 17 ===
8
Title
2.0 Somalia’s National 
Adaptation Plan Process
2.1 Overview of the National Adaptation Plan Process 
The National Adaptation Plan (NAP) process is a strategic, iterative process that helps 
countries conduct comprehensive medium- and long-term climate adaptation planning. It is a 
flexible process that builds on the country’s existing adaptation activities and helps integrate 
climate change into national decision-making. 
The NAP process was established under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
to enable developing countries, including least-developed countries (LDCs), to formulate and 
implement NAPs (LDC Expert Group, 2012). Building on the National Adaptation Programme of 
Action (NAPA)—which focused on short-term, urgent and immediate adaptation needs—the 
NAP process is designed to offer LDC countries like Somalia an opportunity to take a more 
considered approach, working towards transformational change in their capacity to address 
adaptation, with a medium- to long-term approach to reducing vulnerability. This includes the 
institutional arrangements and capacities that have been built, the awareness-raising efforts 
that must be undertaken, and any assessments of vulnerabilities and adaptation priorities that 
are required. It is an entirely country-owned process; there is no one way to develop a NAP, and 
each country’s NAP will match and meet its unique context. This section highlights the goals, 
mandates and status of Somalia’s NAP process. 
2.2 Goals of the NAP Process
The overall goal of Somalia’s NAP process is to reduce vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate 
change and build the resilience of the country and its communities. Specifically, the NAP 
process aims to: 
•	 Define medium- and long-term climate adaptation actions and initiatives for 
implementation by state and non-state actors.
•	 Facilitate the integration of climate change adaptation, in a coherent manner, into 
development planning processes and strategies, within all relevant sectors and at 
different levels.
•	 Enhance the coordination of climate change adaptation in the country.
•	 Promote the mobilization of resources to respond to Somalia’s climate change adaptation 
needs.
=== PAGE 18 ===
9
Title
2.3 Mandate for the NAP Process
Somalia’s NAP process is clearly mandated in its development plans and objectives, given 
that climate change has been identified as a core issue in the country’s development. This is 
particularly clear in Somalia’s most recent National Development Plan (NDP-9), as well as its 
National Climate Change Policy; these two documents, alongside other relevant climate-related 
legislation and policy, explicitly call for the increased integration of Somalia’s development and 
climate adaptation agendas. The NAP offers a crucial opportunity for bringing these together, 
alongside continued local, regional and national efforts to build peace and stability. 
The National Development Plan (NDP-9) for 2020–2024 provides for the country’s development 
priorities for the next five years. Climate change resilience-building is a key theme of the NDP-
9, and the plan recognizes the threats that climate change poses to the government meeting its 
development objectives. Further, it recognizes the poor as the most vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change. The plan recommends strategic interventions across all vulnerable sectors 
of the economy to enhance resilience, while also calling for emissions reductions. There is a 
need for the NAP process to inform and complement the effective implementation of the 
interventions described in the NDP-9 and subsequent NDPs to ensure the sustainable and 
resilient development of Somalia. 
Somalia’s National Climate Change Policy offers further strategic direction for the NAP 
process, particularly on adaptation measures, social development and the mitigation of climate 
change impacts. The policy captures the sectoral laws and strategies that form the legislative 
foundation for specific activities that need to be evaluated for potential improvements in order 
to enhance those activities’ ability to tackle climate change challenges and exploit emerging 
opportunities. The policy calls for better coordination of climate change adaptation in the 
country and for opportunities for cooperation and collaboration between the national and sub-
national levels of government, as well as with development partners and with international and 
regional institutions. The policy also argues for mainstreaming climate change into the federal 
government, state, regions and districts, and into local-level planning processes, including 
national development policies and plans and state development plans. 
The Somali National Disaster Management Policy is another key foundational policy for the NAP, 
as it aims to strengthen community resilience and preparedness for disasters and emergencies. 
The policy seeks to provide a legislative framework for disaster management within government 
institutions while also strengthening the coherence and coordination of humanitarian support 
from international donor organizations. 
This mandate extends down from the national level; besides the federal policies, the Somalia 
NAP process is also guided by other sectoral and state policies and legal frameworks that 
support the adaptation actions, including Somalia’s Integrated Water Resources Management 
Strategy, the Puntland Five-Year Development Plan (2019–2024) and the National Energy Policy 
(2018), among others.
=== PAGE 19 ===
10
Title
2.4 Status of the NAP Process in Somalia 
Adapting to climate change is crucial in Somalia’s pursuit of sustainable development and 
stability. To date, climate adaptation actions are implemented by sector ministries, federal 
member states and CSOs, with support from development partners in Somalia. This work is 
guided by the DoECC, which is based in the Office of the Prime Minister and is the overall 
technical institution mandated to coordinate climate action and implement climate policy. 
However, the DoECC’s role is hampered by a lack of technical, human and financial capacities 
to effectively undertake its mandate. This has resulted in formalized and structured horizontal 
or vertical coordination mechanisms for adaptation planning and actions at the federal level, 
and undefined federal-state roles for climate change adaptation. This has led to a fragmented 
response to humanitarian emergencies as well as weak linkages between immediate relief, 
recovery and longer-term adaptation and development. 
The NAP is to be designed and implemented to address these challenges. Somalia is now at 
the initial phase of its NAP process, and it currently starting to implement its NAP Readiness 
Project, which is funded by the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and will have the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) act as its implementing partner. The overall goal of the 
Readiness Project is to strengthen national and state capacities and coordination for climate 
change adaptation planning and implementation in Somalia. The project has three primary 
expected outcomes, each of which are divided into anticipated sub-outcomes and outputs 
to address the barriers to mainstreaming climate change adaptation in national systems. The 
expected outcomes of the project are (Green Climate Fund, 2019): 
•	 Enhanced national institutional coordination and capacity for adaptation planning. 
•	 Strengthened capacity for climate change adaptation planning at the state level.
•	 Strengthened financial planning for climate change adaptation. 
Through its expected outputs and outcomes, the project aims to support the establishment of 
a national climate change adaptation plan to serve as a baseline and to guide future climate 
change adaptation policies and projects. The NAP report and process will identify Somalia’s 
medium- and long-term adaptation needs and will be informed by the latest assessment and 
reports. This NAP Framework, in laying out the NAP’s vision, guiding principles and approach, 
among other things, is designed to inform the development of Somalia’s NAP process at the 
outset of the Readiness Project.
=== PAGE 20 ===
11
Title
3.0 Linking the Nap Process to 
the Broader Policy Context 
Climate change is a key development challenge for Somalia. Climate change impacts, such as 
severe and more intense floods, heat waves and droughts, continue to have devastating effects 
on the lives and livelihoods of Somalis and on the wider economic development of the country; 
this risks reversing the hard-gained though modest development and security milestones that 
the country has achieved over last few years. It is crucial that Somalia’s adaptation planning 
be integrated into its development planning and budgeting processes at both the federal and 
member state levels and across sectors. This section aims to explore linkages between the 
Somalia NAP process and the broader national development planning and policy discourse—
including peacebuilding—with a view to identifying key entry points and the added value of the 
NAP process in relation to the development documents.
3.1 Relevant Policy and Regulatory Frameworks and the 
Somalia NAP Process 
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (NDP), 2020
The NDP is Somalia’s development blueprint. It lays out the country’s key priorities for the 
development period, usually for a period of five years. It is essential that the short- and 
medium-term adaptation priorities of the NDP are reflected in the NAP process; this will help to 
facilitate effective linkages (including implementation) with sectoral ministries, federal member 
states and other development actors, in both their planning and budgeting processes. 
The current plan is the NDP-9, which covers the period of 2020–2024. The NDP-9 identifies 
climate change as one of the key root causes of poverty in Somalia; for development to 
succeed, climate-proofing economic growth is crucial. As such, climate change resilience-= 
building is a key theme of the NDP-9. The plan recognizes the country’s vulnerabilities to climate 
change impacts, such as frequent and intense floods and droughts. It also notes that these can 
exacerbate population displacements, conflicts and poverty, particularly in a context in which 
they are increasing in their frequency and intensity. The plan recognizes the poor as the most 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
Climate change is mainstreamed into the economic development pillar of the NDP, with an 
emphasis on enhancing adaptation and building the climate change resilience of the agriculture 
and livestock sector (mainstay of the economy and livelihoods). NDP-9 outlines priority 
interventions in each of three pillars and in all vulnerable sectors of economy to both prevent 
and respond to climate crisis and its effects. These include water management investments, 
social protection and investment in renewable energy for Somalia. The NAP’s alignment with 
this plan and its prioritized actions will be crucial to its success.
=== PAGE 21 ===
12
Title
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT POLICY, 2019
The National Environment Policy (NEP), approved by Cabinet, is a core document concerning the 
sustainable management of natural resources for Somalia. It treats climate change and disaster 
management as emerging environmental issues. In this policy document, the government seeks 
to adopt mitigation and adaptation approaches to deal with climate change. 
This policy recognizes that many of the natural disasters in Somalia, such as floods and 
drought, are climate-related and that their negative impacts cut across all key sectors of the 
economy. The NEP is a core document concerning the sustainable management of natural 
resources for Somalia. It provides the necessary government policy regarding climate change in 
the areas of biodiversity protection,  GHG emissions reduction, waste and clean technology. The 
NEP acknowledges that Somalia has a limited adaptive capacity when it comes to the impacts 
of climate change. The policy also emphasizes that country’s continued vulnerability to climate 
change and the threat this poses to achieving long-term development goals should thus be 
recognized. Further, the policy states that the government shall adopt various measures to 
overcome the many challenges brought on by climate change. 
NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY, 2020
This overarching national climate change policy serves as the pillar for comprehensive 
sectoral strategies and action plans. The policy offers a strategic direction, particularly on 
adaptation measures, social development and the mitigation of climate change impacts. The 
policy captures sectorial laws and strategies that form the legislative foundation for specific 
activities that need to be evaluated in order to determine potential improvements that could 
enhance their ability to tackle climate change challenges and exploit emerging opportunities. 
The policy enables better coordination of climate change work in the country and provides 
opportunities for cooperation and collaboration between the national and sub-national levels 
of government as well as with development partners and with international and regional 
institutions. The policy also stipulates the country’s vision and strategies that recognize the 
importance of climate change and of international agreements and national commitments on 
climate change.
SOMALIA’S NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTION (NDC), 2021
NDCs are climate change plans and contributions submitted by countries as part of their 
commitment to the Paris Agreement, which Somalia ratified in 2016. Somalia submitted an 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) in 2015, which included nationwide 
sectoral mitigation and adaption measures. The document provides a brief overview of 
Somalia’s climate and some economic drivers of vulnerability. The enhanced Nationally 
Determined Contribution (2021–2030) submitted by Somalia in 2021 has comprehensive 
adaptation and mitigation actions to be implemented by the country. The NAP will complement 
Somalia’s NDC, outlining how the country intends to meet its medium- and long-term 
adaptation priorities and reduce climate vulnerabilities. 
SOMALI NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT POLICY, 2018 
The Somali National Disaster Management Policy aims to strengthen community resilience 
and preparedness for disasters and emergencies. The policy seeks to provide a legislative
=== PAGE 22 ===
13
Title
framework for disaster management within government institutions while also strengthening 
the coherence and coordination of humanitarian support from international donor 
organizations. The framework provides guidelines for incorporating disaster risk reduction into 
the national development planning process, and will outline priority investments in disaster 
preparedness, early warning, mitigation and recovery. This policy provides an entry point for 
exploiting synergies between disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation in terms 
of institutional support and developing project pipelines; the NAP will build on the work of this 
policy and on the lessons learned to date in its implementation.
DROUGHT IMPACT NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY AND RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK, 
2018 
The Drought Impact Needs Assessment estimated the impacts of the 2016–17 drought 
on Somalia and attempted to identify key adaptation needs. The assessment fed into the 
development of a Recovery and Resilience Framework (RRF).
The RRF will support Somalia’s progress from early drought recovery through to longer-term 
resilience and disaster preparedness and is intended to enable the country to break the cycle of 
vulnerability and humanitarian crisis caused by frequent climate-related shocks. The Framework 
aims to facilitate a more efficient financial response by the Government of Somalia and its 
development and humanitarian partners, primarily using current funding modalities and aid 
coordination structures.
The RRF aims to: 
•	 strengthen the capacity of the government to support drought recovery and improve 
disaster risk management; 
•	 revitalize, strengthen and diversify economic livelihoods and key infrastructure; 
•	 promote durable solutions for displacement-affected communities; 
•	 enhance the sustainable management of natural resources and access to renewable 
energy; and
•	 improve primary service delivery in affected urban and peri-urban areas. 
The RRF has prioritized the following sectors: agriculture, nutrition, education, transport, 
environment, social protection, gender, governance, disaster management, and water, sanitation 
and hygiene (WASH).
NATIONAL VOLUNTARY LAND DEGRADATION NEUTRALITY TARGETS (LDN), 2020
This document, developed under global initiative of the United Nations Convention to 
Combat Desertification (UNCCD), recognizes land degradation caused by drought as a major 
impediment to national economic development as it adversely affects livestock and agriculture, 
which contributes heavily to its Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Some of the targets set under 
the document include: 
•	 achievement of LDN by 2030 as compared to baseline 2015 (no net loss) 
•	 improvement of an additional 10 per cent of the territory by 2030
=== PAGE 23 ===
14
Title
•	 increase of national forest cover from 10.14 per cent (2015) to 10.20 per cent (2022) 
and maintained at 30 per cent by 2030 through agroforestry and sustainable land 
management 
•	 reduced consumption of biomass energy by half 
•	 reduced soil erosion 
•	 reduced conversion of forests and wetlands into other uses 
•	 restoration and increase of land productivity. 
SOMALIA’S NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN (NBSAP), 2015 
The NBSAP, developed under the Convention on Biological Diversity in 2015, has direct linkages 
with biodiversity and climate change response in the country. The strategy aims to establish 
understanding of drivers of biodiversity degradation, many of which are shared with climate 
vulnerability, and to devise response measures. The strategy identifies gaps in capacities, policy 
and resource mobilization and coordination for the effective management and monitoring of 
biodiversity, and how these must be addressed. Complementing these response strategies 
through the NAP will lead to shared benefits for climate resilience and biodiversity.
NATIONAL ADAPTATION PROGRAMME OF ACTION (NAPA), 2013
Somalia’s National Adaptation Programme for Actions on Climate Change (NAPAs) was 
submitted to UNFCCC in April 2013. It was the first national-level document to identify 
the urgent and immediate climate change adaptation needs of the most vulnerable groups 
throughout Somalia. It provides the starting point from which climate change adaptation 
can be mainstreamed into development plans as a critical strategy for attaining sustainable 
development and poverty reduction (MDG, 2010). The NAPA acknowledges and addresses the 
fact that climate change has and will continue to have wide-ranging impacts within and across 
multiple sectors and that the knowledge and capacity to respond is lacking. The document 
presents an analysis of institutional, financial, technological and informational barriers facing 
climate action in Somalia. The NAPA has three main objectives: to build community awareness 
on climate change, to increase monitoring and risk forecasting capacities, and to support the 
adoption of government policies and strategies to improve resilience to climate risks among 
vulnerable population groups (including women and children) and economic sectors. The NAP 
intends to build on the legacy of this important document, extending its timeline beyond urgent 
and immediate needs to medium- and long-term climate resilience.
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY (NEP), 2018 
The overall objective of the NEP is to increase access to efficient, affordable and sustainable 
energy for urban and rural communities in order for the private sector to thrive and for the 
public sector to meet national energy demand in order to provide better essential services, 
boost economic growth and reduce poverty. The policy promotes the widespread production, 
use and storage of renewable energy through diversification, innovation, technical cooperation 
and technology transfer as a way of reducing deforestation pressures for biomass energy 
generation. It also promotes investment in modern, integrated and commercially viable models 
of energy supply. The NAP’s alignment with the National Energy Policy is crucial for the 
advancement of shared goals, such as reduced deforestation, but also given that the provision
=== PAGE 24 ===
15
Title
of reliable renewable energy will be a central component of Somalia’s development strategy 
going forward. 
SOMALIA NUTRITION STRATEGY, 2020–2025
Somalia’s Nutrition Strategy was developed by the federal government’s Ministry of Health 
and Human Services. The strategy aims to ensure the provision of quality nutrition services 
to all people, with a specific focus on the most vulnerable, including women and children. It 
targets the strengthening of local and national capacities of workers involved in the sector to 
contribute to the overall enhancement of the quality of health service delivery in Somalia. The 
Somalia Nutrition Strategy (2020–2025) is aligned with the NDP and other downstream policies 
and strategies, and is designed to address the triple burden of malnutrition: the coexistence of 
overnutrition, undernutrition and micronutrient deficiencies. It is also designed to contribute 
to the achievement of the nutrition-related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), World 
Health Assembly resolutions, and Global Nutrition Targets for 2025. Much work remains to be 
done; the evidence points to a high continued malnutrition rates among children under five and 
women, particularly during climate-change-related flash floods or extended drought periods, 
both of which serve to undermine household food security. A key aspect of the NAP will be 
ensuring food security in the face of a changing climate; alignment with the Nutrition Strategy 
is therefore crucial.
INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (IWRM) STRATEGY 
This strategy is under development. It will co-ordinate integrated water management, guide the 
creation of appropriate rates and standardize best practices.
SOMALIA’S INITIAL NATIONAL COMMUNICATION (INC), 2018
The INC, submitted to UNFCCC in 2018, highlights the country’s situational context with 
respect to climate change and its steps towards the implementation of the UN Climate 
Convention as well as proposed mitigation and adaptation strategies. The report indicates 
that Somalia’s climate change actions aim to safeguard the environment, sustain the society 
and support economic growth and sustainability for future generations. It also promotes a 
comprehensive nationwide response to climate change actions, including adaptation, mitigation 
and creating resilient communities. The report indicates overall gaps and constraints, including 
the capacity, financial and technological challenges faced by the country in its efforts to 
respond to climate change. 
NATIONAL CAPACITY SELF-ASSESSMENT TOWARDS IMPLEMENTING RIO CONVENTIONS, 
2017
The National Capacity Self-Assessment outlines the key challenges Somalia faces in meeting 
the commitments outlined in the Rio Convention. This document highlights some of the key 
national-level capacity gaps for responding to the challenges of climate change, biodiversity 
loss, ecosystem degradation and conflict and security.
DRAFT NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN (NESAP), 2021
The Federal Government of Somalia, with support from UNEP, has prepared a draft NESAP 
whose main goal is to put in place mechanisms and measures to ensure the sustainable
=== PAGE 25 ===
16
Title
management and use of Somalia’s rich natural and environmental resources for the wellbeing 
of the people and for the growth and development of the economy. The strategy has four 
strategic objectives: strengthening governance, conducting assessments, implementing priority 
interventions, and increasing public awareness and knowledge management for effective 
environmental management and climate change response. Climate change is a key challenge 
elaborated in the NESAP, and it recommends measures to assess climate change risks and key 
adaptation measures to be implemented for the next five years. The NAP should be fully aligned 
with and build on this risk assessment and identification of adaptation measures. 
DRAFT CHARCOAL POLICY, 2020
The draft Charcoal Policy aims to halt the export of charcoal from Somalia and to regulate 
its domestic consumption in a sustainable manner in order to minimize the negative socio-
economic and environmental impacts of domestic charcoal production, including deforestation. 
The policy will also pave the way for promoting alternative energy sources by providing 
alternative livelihoods to the charcoal value chain beneficiaries involved in the charcoal 
production and trade. 
DRAFT GENDER POLICY, 2020 
Somalia’s draft gender policy aims to establish a framework to guide the process of developing 
and implementing legislation, policies, and programs that will promote equal rights and 
opportunities for women and men in all spheres of life. Specifically, the policy’s objectives are to 
eliminate gender discrimination, reduce inequalities, increase women’s participation in decision-
making, promote women’s empowerment, create awareness and positive culture change and 
enhance the government’s accountability. The policy proposes priority interventions in the 
sectors of economic empowerment, health, education and political participation. Responsibility 
for undertaking these interventions lies with all actors, including government ministries, 
directorates and agencies, local governments, the private sector and civil society. Promoting 
gender equality will be a guiding principle for the NAP. 
THE UNITED NATIONS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION FRAMEWORK, 2020
The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (2021–2025) represents 
the commitment of the Federal Government of Somalia and the United Nations to work 
together to achieve peace, stability and prosperity for all Somalis in support of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Cooperation Framework reflects the commitment of the United Nations in Somalia to 
advancing Somalia’s peace and development priorities and fully aligning its support to the 
Somalia’s National Development Plan-9 in a spirit of partnership, cooperation, transparency 
and mutual respect, in accordance with the 2017 New Partnership for Somalia. The Cooperation 
Framework also serves as the United Nations’ accountability framework to the Federal 
Government of Somalia and its people. The Cooperation Framework’s strategic priorities are 
inclusive politics and reconciliation, security and rule of law, economic development and social 
development. Recognizing that climate change impacts can exacerbate local and national 
conflict drivers, and that stability and security will not be achieved without increased climate 
resilience, climate change actions are mainstreamed in the strategic priorities of the framework, 
particularly under security and rule of law, economic development and social development. The
=== PAGE 26 ===
17
Title
NAP, through a comprehensive and participatory identification and implementation of priority 
climate actions, can help to address some of the shared vulnerabilities to both climate impacts 
and conflict in Somalia. 
UN GENDER EQUALITY STRATEGY, 2018–2020
UN organizations play a key role in Somalia’s development. The UN Gender Equality Strategy 
(2018–2020) provides a framework for planned, systematic and collective attention to gender 
equality and women’s empowerment and action by the different UN entities in line with global 
commitments and commitments in the diverse assistance and co-operation frameworks 
to Somalia. The Strategy responds to the country’s current gender inequalities and related 
developmental challenges, and articulates the centrality of gender mainstreaming in the 
implementation of the assistance and cooperation frameworks of the UN. It also provides a 
framework and guidance for the promotion and institutionalization of gender mainstreaming, 
which will continue in the NAP process. It calls for a greater accountability for delivering 
gender-related results, and offers practical tools and guidance on how to achieve this. The 
implementation plan of this Strategy sets out in detail the actions, actors and timeframe for 
realizing results and fulfilling the objectives and goals set forth in the Strategy.
3.3 GCF Readiness Proposal and Somalia NAP Process
NAP READINESS PROJECT 
Somalia is implementing a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) Readiness Programme funded by the 
GCF, with implementation support from UNDP. The overall goal of the project is to strengthen 
national and state-level capacity and coordination for climate change adaptation planning and 
implementation in Somalia. The project has three primary expected outcomes, each of which 
are divided into expected sub-outcomes and outputs to address the barriers to mainstreaming 
climate change adaptation in national systems. Through its outputs and outcomes, the projects 
aim to support the establishment of a national climate change adaptation plan to serve as a 
baseline and to guide future climate change adaptation policies and projects. The expected 
outcomes of the project are: enhanced national institutional coordination and capacity for 
adaptation planning, strengthened capacity for climate change adaptation planning at the 
state level, and strengthened financial planning for climate change adaptation (Green Climate 
Fund, 2019). The ultimate objective of the NAP Readiness Project is to develop to identify 
medium- and long-term adaptation needs informed by the latest assessment and reports. The 
NAP Readiness Project is currently in its initial planning phase, with the project management 
team being established. 
NATIONAL DESIGNATED AUTHORITY (NDA) READINESS PROJECT
The government of Somalia is developing a second proposed Readiness Project for submission 
to the GCF. It will be the first readiness request to the GCF outside of NAP Readiness Project. 
The proposal is under development in close consultation with the Global Water Partnership 
(GWP). Activities under this request will fill the urgent need for strengthening the National 
Designated Authority (NDA) and with the development of a GCF Country Program, a climate
=== PAGE 27 ===
18
Title
finance policy and project pipeline for Somalia, and concept note. Key priorities to be elaborated 
in the country program and project pipeline will include adaptation priorities and actions.
3.4 Linkage to Peacebuilding Initiatives 
The security situation in Somalia has improved in recent years, but remains fragile, and the 
gains could be reversed if they are not consolidated. Climate change and its effects, including 
droughts leading to water and pasture scarcity, are recognized as a significant cause of conflict 
in Somalia’s nomadic pastoralist societies. Recurrent recent droughts and related environmental 
shocks have contributed to increased poverty, displacement, biodiversity loss and, ultimately, 
exacerbated conflict (Federal Government of Somalia, 2020b). To strengthen the sustainability 
of both climate adaptation and peacebuilding efforts, it is essential that inclusive and gender-
responsive climate action be integrated into peacebuilding and state-building efforts.
Some of the key policies related to peacebuilding efforts in Somalia, and their links to climate 
change and the NAP process, are described below. 
NATIONAL RECONCILIATION FRAMEWORK (NRF) 
The goal of the NRF is to contribute to a sense of sustained peace and stability by laying the 
ground for genuine, comprehensive national reconciliation for the Somali people. It will do so 
by restoring trust among different segments of the population and increasing confidence in 
all levels of government institutions, resulting in peaceful coexistence, renewed relationships, 
and social and economic recovery. Social reconciliation is a key pillar of the NRF, which aims 
to address issues around disputed areas and lands by addressing the challenges of the past, 
including a lack of trust, suspicion, clan rivalry, active conflicts, displacement, destruction of 
traditional mechanisms, poor clan leadership, and the relationship between clan and state. 
Adapting to climate change, through the NAP process, could provide a shared challenge around 
which formerly conflictual parties can unite and build dialogue, trust and partnership. 
NATIONAL STABILIZATION STRATEGY (NSS) 
The overall goal of NSS is to improve stability in Somalia by delivering tangible results that 
strengthen cohesion within communities and between communities and their government. 
The purpose of the strategy is to support a combination of peacebuilding and state-building 
interventions and to prevent violence through, among other efforts, engaging communities in 
dialogue to address their legitimate grievances, developing confidence-building measures, and 
expanding socio-economic opportunities to build resilient communities and reduce poverty. 
The focus areas are community recovery, social reconciliation, local governance, and rule of law. 
The inclusion of women, youth and other vulnerable or under-represented groups in stabilization 
efforts is a core element of the strategy. The stabilization interventions are collectively intended 
to remove conflict drivers that are exploited by al-Shabaab, and to develop more inclusive, 
accountable and democratic structures. As with the NRF, a participatory, inclusive and gender-
responsive NAP process could provide one means of achieving the objectives of the NSS.
=== PAGE 28 ===
19
Title
THE WADAJIR FRAMEWORK FOR LOCAL GOVERNANCE 
This framework was adopted in November 2015, outlines a series of measures focusing on the 
third tier of the government structure: the district level. The Wadajir Framework recognizes the 
crucial functions performed by the elected and lowest level of government, while maintaining 
sufficient coherence within the state and society structures. Decentralized governance 
arrangements and service delivery are pivotal in building incremental trust between citizens and 
federal, state and local government. Therefore, the implementation of the Wadajir Framework for 
Local Governance will be an extension of the government’s bottom-up approach to political and 
local security stabilization. Similarly, resilience-building will be impossible without the cooperation 
and input of local governments; it is at this level that climate impacts are most felt, and most 
effectively addressed. The lowest level of government will play an important role in Somalia’s 
evolving governance arrangement and thus should be engaged fully in the NAP process.
3.5 Linkage with COVID-19 Preparedness and Response Plan 
The Somalia COVID-19 Country Preparedness and Response Plan (CPRP) is a joint effort by 
UN agencies and cluster partners, including NGOs, to respond to the direct public health and 
indirect immediate humanitarian and socio-economic consequences of COVID-19. The plan 
does not include a program for “building back better.” The plan recognizes climate change as a 
threat multiplier aggravating the already fragile situation, increasing threats to food security 
and livelihoods and thus also increasing social tension and conflicts, including increases in 
domestic violence, human rights violations, violence against vulnerable populations, and inter-, 
intra-communal and clan violence. As the country undertakes recovery plans, it is essential that 
climate change adaptation and resilience-building be incorporated into these planning and 
budgeting processes. This can be included in all vulnerable sectors that are also of priority in 
recovery efforts, including water, agriculture and livestock, energy and the informal sector.
3.6 Added Value of the NAP Process in Relation to These 
Other Policy Documents
The NAP process can help to identify priority adaptation goals and translate them into action 
to support the wider federal and federal member states’ development planning and policy 
processes in Somalia. The NAP process 
•	 highlights and provides focus on the importance of adaptation and resilience-building 
actions in development; 
•	 supports the integration of climate change adaptation into national and sub-national 
level development planning and budgeting processes; 
•	 enhances synergies between adaptation and mitigation actions for a low-carbon and 
climate-resilient economy; 
•	 enhances linkages between adaptation and peacebuilding efforts; and 
•	 enhances the resilience of vulnerable populations to climate shocks through adaptation 
and disaster risk reduction strategies.
=== PAGE 29 ===
20
Title
Furthermore, the NAP process can inform possible future iterations of the NDC adaptation 
goals, and help align the NDC to broader sustainable development goals and Somalia’s other 
international commitments, such as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and 
the Convention on Biological Diversity. The NAP process can also support the establishment 
of coherent and strengthened governance structures at the national level, and, through linking 
the NAP to other planning and policy processes, can prevent the duplication of efforts and 
promote transparency, access to limited resources and efficient use of those resources. NAP 
timelines, focused on the medium to long term, are well aligned with those of the NDP-9 and 
other development and peacebuilding agendas, and the resources available to Somalia through 
the NAP process can serve to further strengthen the capacities, institutions and governance 
mechanisms needed to build lasting resilience and peace (Crawford & Church, 2020).
=== PAGE 30 ===
21
Title
4.0 Approaches and Structure 
for the Nap Process 
4.1 Context 
Somalia is emerging from a series of protracted civil conflicts which have significantly hindered 
the country’s natural resources management, climate change response and related governance 
structures. While terrorism remains a critical threat in the south of the country, in the last 
decade, there is reason for optimism; relative stability has returned to parts of the country, and 
governance structures are improving, even if they are not yet as effective as the systems that 
existed before the war. One of the more recently established institutions  is the DoECC, which is 
responsible for managing, coordinating and supervising all matters relating to the environment 
and climate change in Somalia. The DoECC continues to play a critical role in putting in place 
the policies and legislative frameworks for addressing climate change in the country, and will 
lead the NAP process.
Under the Climate Change Policy, the federal government has to set up a climate change 
coordination mechanism to mainstream climate action across the breadth of government. A 
high level Coordination committee  is chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister and comprising 
of the Ministers for planning and economic promotion, finance, humanitarian and disaster 
management, fisheries and marine resources, agriculture, livestock and pasture, and power and 
water. Actions across all vertical levels of government are to be coordinated at technical level by 
an intergovernmental coordination mechanism involving state-level officials of the environment 
and chaired by the Director-General of the Environment Directorate at the federal level. The 
DoECC will spearhead the NAP process, with priorities emerging from the federal government 
and member state stakeholders. 
4.2 Specific Themes for the Somalia NAP Process
Through consultation with affected stakeholders, a number of key issues and themes emerged 
for Somalia’s NAP process. 
4.2.1 Enhancing Vertical Integration
Somalia’s federal government is based in Mogadishu, and governance is officially divided into 
six semiautonomous federal member states and one special region, each of which in turn 
are divided into districts. The federal member states are Southwest, Somaliland, Hirshabelle, 
Jubbaland, Galmudug, Puntland, and the Banadir Regional Administration.The NAP process, led 
by the federal government, has to make deliberate and strategic linkages between adaptation 
planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation at the federal and federal member 
state levels so that these activities can be aligned, informed and mutually supportive. Vertical
=== PAGE 31 ===
22
Title
integration between these levels of governance will enable sub-national authorities and local 
organizations to access the information, resources (including finance) and capacity they need 
to plan and implement adaptation. Additionally, this will facilitate the capturing of sub-national 
adaptation processes, outcomes and learning, while ensuring that national-level results and 
lessons are shared to inform sub-national planning and implementation (Dazé, Price-Kelly & 
Rass, 2016). Clear coordination structures should be put into place that bring together federal 
member states and federal government stakeholders through the planning and implementation 
of adaptation actions. 
4.2.2 Alignment with National Development Plans and Peacebuilding 
Processes 
There is a clear link between climate change, conflict and poverty in Somalia. Thus, the effective 
mainstreaming of adaptation planning will require that adaptation priorities be aligned with 
and integrated into National Development Planning, the Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) and peacebuilding processes. The priorities identified in the NAP and NDC should be 
incorporated into the implementation process of the NDP-9, respective sector strategies 
and plans, and peacebuilding initiatives. Similarly, the objectives and timelines of the NDP 
and peacebuilding agendas should be reflected in the NAP. NDP-9 is already incorporating 
climate change considerations, and is aiming to build on NDP-8’s inclusive national planning 
process, which created widespread awareness about planning and therefore engendered 
broad ownership. Somalia’s NAP process shares this aim and thus should aim to align with 
the timelines of the subsequent NDP and sector plans to effectively inform these processes. 
Furthermore, the NAP process should be aligned with other country-level processes to meet 
the commitments Somalia has made under the 2030 Agenda, the Paris Agreement, National 
Environment Action Planning and the Sendai Framework. This will increase coherence, efficiency 
and effectiveness towards development outcomes that are resilient and sustainable.
4.2.3 A Participatory, Inclusive, Whole-of-Society Approach
Climate change impacts are felt by all; urban and rural populations, pastoralists, farmers 
and businesspeople. As part of its NAP process, the government of Somalia will develop and 
disseminate climate-sensitive information, particularly for adaptation, tailored for different 
sectors and audiences. Recognizing that civil society organizations are active in planning and 
undertaking responses to disasters, which are largely induced by climate change, the government 
will encourage such organizations to take a long-term view of their interventions in order to 
enhance their climate resilience. The government will also involve academia and the international 
research community to help it analyze climate vulnerabilities and propose technologies and 
approaches to minimize emissions and adapt to the challenges of climate change. 
The private sector must also be a key partner. The private sector in Somalia is very vibrant and 
continues to prosper despite decades of conflict. As a result, many traditional public goods and 
services—including electricity, water, health and agriculture—are largely provided by the private 
sector. These sectors are often responsive to new innovations and quick to adapt new, cost-
effective technologies. In its NAP process, Somalia will prioritize creating awareness among the 
private sector of the need to climate-proof their investments, and of the business opportunities 
– including new goods and services – presented by the urgent need to adapt to climate change.
=== PAGE 32 ===
23
Title
4.2.4 Gender-Responsive NAP Process
According to UNDP’s Gender in Somalia report, Somalia’s Gender Index stood at 0.776 (with 1 
denoting complete gender inequality), placing Somalia at the fourth highest position globally 
(UNDP Somalia, n.d.). The report further indicates that Somalia remains a highly unequal 
society by income, gender and geographical location. Gender inequality and climate change 
vulnerability are inextricably linked.
Climate change and its devastating effects on all sectors of the economy in Somalia has 
significant gender dimensions, as discussed. Women and youth, and especially those in rural 
areas, are most affected due to their vulnerabilities, their reliance on livelihoods that are 
dependent on natural resources affected by climate, their responsibilities toward their families, 
and their role in safeguarding community survival. Women are on the frontline of confronting 
the challenges posed by climate change to the livelihoods and the health of their families, 
and yet they are often poorly equipped and under-resourced to respond to the challenge, and 
are not adequately included in decision-making on climate action. Adding to the challenge, 
conflicts have eroded many of the gains made in education, health care and employment prior 
to the civil war, which has perpetuated and deepened gender inequality. 
The government of Somalia is committed to mainstreaming gender equality across its 
development and climate change policies and plans. It recognizes the critical need to actively 
pursue the greater involvement of women, youth, people with disabilities and other marginalized 
groups in the development and implementation of the NDP, the NAP and the NDC. This will 
be pursued by recognizing and mainstreaming the different needs and concerns of men, 
women and other groups, and ensuring effective and inclusive participation in planning and 
implementation processes. This will be done by engaging with NGOs and women’s organizations 
to strengthen their capacities to mobilize, participate and advocate for change; making 
deliberate efforts to tailor information packaging and communication to diverse groups to 
improve inclusion; and providing opportunities to participate in workshops and meetings and to 
contribute perspectives that can influence greater inclusion and equality.
4.2.5 Prioritizing Resource Mobilization for Implementation 
Due to its fragility and widespread multidimensional poverty, Somalia continues to face serious 
financial, technological and capacity constraints, each of which will hinder the implementation 
of its NAP and NDC and will require significant financial support and investments from 
international and domestic partners. Opportunities exist as well; adapting to climate change 
will create jobs and will require new products and services that the private sector and other 
partners can provide and profit from. However, significant resources will have to be mobilized to 
move from adaptation planning to implementation. 
The NAP process should prioritize mobilizing resources from a wide range of sources, including 
through international public finance sources, to implement the identified adaptation and 
climate resilient priority actions. Currently, the country is facing capacity constraints that 
present challenges in understanding, navigating and accessing climate finance. Therefore, 
there is need to enhance the country’s capacity to access international climate financing, 
including the development of its NDC implementation roadmap, its GCF country program and
=== PAGE 33 ===
24
Title
a pipeline of realistic, bankable adaptation projects targeted for different potential climate 
finance sources. Somalia must also enhance its access to both bilateral sources of support and 
multilateral climate funds. 
There is also a need to focus strategic efforts and engagements on the private sector in order 
to leverage the potential of these entities to support a more resilient and green Somalia. 
Somalia will require support to enhance the policy and regulatory environment needed to 
attract international support and private-sector investment for its adaptation and climate 
resilience development agenda. 
4.2.6 Promotion of Good Governance and Strengthening National 
Capacity 
An important impediment to Somalia’s effective adaptation planning, implementation and 
monitoring is weak governance and the lack of technical capacities among its ministries due 
to a long period of instability and conflict. The NAP process should be guided by the need to 
establish and fully operationalize strong, resilient governance structures and institutions that 
can effectively plan for and implement climate adaptation. 
4.2.7 Community-Based Adaptation 
The women, men and children of local communities in Somalia, including farmers and 
pastoralists, bear the brunt of climate change. It is essential that NAP process be community-
centered, with local communities fully participating in defining and planning for adaptation 
priorities that suit local situations. These communities must also be fully involved in the 
implementation and monitoring of climate adaptation initiatives. Increased community 
ownership in adaptation actions will enhance the implementation of these interventions and 
the capacity of local communities to adapt to climate change and variability. To facilitate 
this, deliberate efforts have to be made to unpack key concepts and policy frameworks, raise 
awareness and build the capacities of local communities to understand and participate fully 
and effectively in the NAP process. 
4.3 Proposed Institutional Arrangements for the Somalia 
NAP Process
The National Climate Change Policy (2020), recently approved by the Somalia Cabinet, provides 
the institutional arrangement required for climate action, including the Somalia NAP process. 
These institutions, however, have extremely limited operational capacity and are not yet fitted 
with the institutional frameworks and operational structures required for effective climate 
change functions and coordination. The main entities established by the policy and their 
possible role in the NAP process are described below. 
DIRECTORATE OF ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
This directorate, situated in the Office of the Prime Minister, has the mandate to formulate 
federal climate policies and coordinate climate change activities by federal institutions, federal 
member states, local governments, international partners and other stakeholders. The office
=== PAGE 34 ===
25
Title
also serves as UNFCCC National Focal Point and the National Designated Authority (NDA) for 
the Green Climate Fund. The office will take the lead in coordinating Somalia’s NAP process. 
NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE COMMITTEE (NCCC) 
The NCCC has the mandate for coordinating and supervising the implementation of the 
climate change policy. The NCCC is a multi-stakeholder, high-level policy coordination 
committee and is responsible for the overall coordination and supervision of climate change 
activities in Somalia. It comprises the Prime Minister (or his designate), the Director General 
of the Directorate of Environment and Climate Change, sectoral ministries, directors of 
government agencies, member states’ ministers for environment, and representatives from the 
private sector and civil society organizations. 
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SECTORAL MINISTRIES 
The NCCP identifies key ministries which have an important role in climate change. These 
are the federal ministries of Energy and Water Resources; Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster 
Management; Agriculture; Fisheries and Marine Resources; Livestock; Natural Resources and 
Petroleum; Public Works, Housing and Reconstruction; Ports and Marine Transport; Transport 
and Civil Aviation; Post and Telecommunication; Health; and Education. These ministries 
should aim to integrate climate change adaptation into sectoral budgets, strategies, plans and 
projects. These ministries should work closely with the Directorate on the coordination of NAP 
process for Somalia.
FEDERAL MEMBER STATE GOVERNMENTS 
The federal member states of Somaliland, Puntland, Galmudug, Southwest State, Jubbaland, 
and Hirshabelle, and the special region of Benadir, are policy implementers in their respective 
regions. These states have their own ministries responsible for climate change. The member 
state governments integrate and mainstream climate change adaptation actions, interventions 
and duties into their respective development plans, and they coordinate and implement 
adaptation actions at state levels. Given their role in state and local adaptation action, 
federal member state governments will be key partners in NAP planning, implementation and 
monitoring and evaluation. 
CROSS-SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON CLIMATE CHANGE (CSCCC) 
The proposed CSCCC established by the policy will bring together line ministries, departments 
and agencies which have roles in climate projects, and programs and in implementing related 
activities. The CSCCC will be chaired by the DG of the Directorate of Environment and Climate 
Change, with representatives ideally drawn from the DG level. The primary roles of the CSCCC 
will be as follows (Federal Government of Somalia, 2020a): 
•	 serve as a cross-sector forum for the exchange of ideas, including the provision of 
updates on ongoing and planned climate change initiatives; 
•	 coordinate and advise on the sector-specific and cross-sector implementation of 
activities, and advise on monitoring and evaluation outcomes as well as future directions 
of the NCCP; and 
•	 address the cross-cutting and social aspects of climate change.
=== PAGE 35 ===
26
Title
CENTRE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RESEARCH 
A new Centre for Climate Change Research is to be established, primarily to: 
•	 facilitate research on climate change; 
•	 coordinate interdisciplinary research around climate change, mitigation and adaptation 
and vulnerabilities and projections; 
•	 disseminate research findings to all the stakeholders; and 
•	 provide technical and policy relevant guidance to the Directorate and Sector Ministries. 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTORS AND CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS 
In recognition of the important role that civil society plays in natural resource and 
environmental governance in Somalia, the Government of Somalia supports mechanisms for 
enhancing their role and participation in climate change governance. Currently, a wide range 
of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society organizations (CSOs) are directly 
and indirectly involved in environmental protection and climate-change-related issues in 
Somalia. Some of these NGOs and CSOs implement specific climate change initiatives at the 
community level, as well as engaging in climate change policy advocacy at the national and 
international levels. It is important that the country develop a CSO Engagement Strategy to 
facilitate effective and institutionalized mechanisms for CSO participation in climate change 
processes.
PRIVATE SECTOR 
Somalia has a vibrant private sector which plays a key role in implementing climate change 
adaptation actions. The government recognizes their role and thus should develop a private 
sector engagement strategy to facilitate their effective engagement in the NAP process, 
including the identification of key strategic actions, financing options and coordination 
structures. 
Figure 3 is a diagrammatic presentation of the institutional arrangements in the policy.
=== PAGE 36 ===
27
Title
Figure 3. Proposed institutional arrangement 
Note: Arrow lines indicate reporting/information exchange.
Source: National Climate Change Policy 2020
In addition, the following key institutions have an important role in Somalia’s NAP process and 
should be represented in all coordination structures, including at the high-level NCCC and at 
the technical-level CSCCC established in the policy and described above. 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING, INVESTMENT AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MOPIED) 
MoPIED is responsible for development planning and coordination of all development aid to 
Somalia. The Ministry should support the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into the 
overall development planning processes. 
Directorate of 
Environment & 
Climate Change
Centre for 
Climate Change 
Research
Centre for 
Climate Change 
Research
Centre for 
Climate Change 
Research
Sector Ministries
Cabinet
Member States
Parliament
Centre for 
Climate Change 
Research
Centre for 
Climate Change 
Research
=== PAGE 37 ===
28
Title
MINISTRY OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT (MOHADM) 
MoHADM is responsible for streamlining the government’s approach to addressing crises and 
disasters, including preparing for and managing disasters and coordinating with humanitarian 
organizations and donor agencies. There are strong linkages between climate change and 
vulnerability to natural disasters in Somalia, and thus MoHADM has an important role to play in 
the NAP process. 
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENT (MOWHRD) 
This ministry is responsible for reversing inequality and protecting the rights of women, children 
and other disadvantaged groups of people, and for establishing social protection frameworks 
for vulnerable groups. MoWHRD will play an important role as an entry point for gender-
sensitive climate change adaptation planning and implementation. 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (MOF) 
The Ministry of Finance serves as the coordinating body for international financial institutions 
and should be involved in activities that aim to incorporate climate change adaptation 
considerations into domestic budgeting processes. The MoF should be involved in activities 
geared towards putting in place the enabling conditions for increased international support for 
climate change adaptation projects and programs in the country. 
DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS 
Somalia receives significant resources from development partners for climate change 
adaptation, humanitarian assistance and wider development. As such, development partners, 
including multilateral organizations and bilateral partners, are important players in the NAP 
process and should be represented where possible in the coordination mechanisms.
=== PAGE 38 ===
29
Title
5.0 Guiding Principles for the 
NAP Process
This chapter elaborates key guiding principles for Somalia’s NAP process. These principles 
build on the principles established by the UNFCCC and are designed to specifically respond to 
Somalia’s unique context. 
Principle 1: Country-Driven and Country-Owned Process
Somalia’s NAP process must facilitate country-owned, country-driven adaptation action that 
responds to the country’s specific needs and situations. The country and its people must have 
full ownership of the NAP process and the NAP process should seek to harness and build upon 
national-level capacities to respond to the effects of climate change, with support from various 
partners.
Principle 2: Linkages with National Development and 
Peacebuilding Efforts 
Climate change and conflict are key developmental issues for Somalia; the NDP-9 considers 
climate change and conflicts as root causes of poverty in the country. Both climate and 
conflict vulnerability share common drivers in the country, and this vulnerability threatens to 
reverse modest development gains. The Somalia NAP process will be guided by the principle 
that climate change adaptation, development and peacebuilding planning and actions must 
be aligned in order to most effectively address the shared drivers of vulnerability for Somalia, 
and to set the country on a strong path of resilience, stability and peace. The NAP will seek 
to enhance the coherence and integration of adaptation and development planning and 
peacebuilding processes within the country. This includes efforts to climate-proof governance 
and peacebuilding actions, and to design adaptation actions that are sensitive to the causes 
and dynamics of local and national conflicts. The NAP process should also aim to align 
with Somalia’s other relevant global commitments, including Agenda 2030 and the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Principle 3: Gender-Responsiveness
Somalia’s NAP process will aim to promote gender-responsive climate adaptation planning, 
implementation and monitoring across the country—that is, adaptation actions that actively 
seek to promote gender equality. Climate change has differentiated impacts on women, men, 
boys and girls in Somalia, with women, children and other vulnerable groups disproportionately 
affected. Integrating a gender-responsive approach into the NAP process will help to ensure
=== PAGE 39 ===
30
Title
men’s and women’s equal participation in and influence on adaptation decision-making 
processes and the implementation of adaptation activities. It will help to ensure that women’s 
and men’s different adaptation needs and capacities are recognized and acted upon. It will 
help to ensure gender-equitable access to financial resources and other benefits coming from 
investments in adaptation (NAP Global Network, n.d.). And at the least, it can help to ensure 
that the NAP process and the activities it entails will not exacerbate gender inequalities. This 
leads to better adaptation and more resilient communities, as the wealth of knowledge of all 
groups is effectively utilized. 
Principle 4: Conflict-Sensitive
Climate change and variability  are interlinked with conflict in Somalia. Increasing temperatures, 
changes in rainfall patterns, and increasingly severe drought and flooding events have combined 
to exacerbate many of the traditional drivers of conflict in Somalia, including poverty, resource 
competition and inter-communal tensions and grievances. The burden often falls on the most 
vulnerable, resource-dependent communities; conflicts among pastoralist groups, for example, 
are expected to continue to rise as these groups increasingly struggle to find adequate water 
and pasture. At the same time, the loss of climate-dependent livelihoods, particularly among 
young people, increases the risks of violence as unemployed and poor youth are lured to armed 
militia groups, exacerbating the already volatile situation of the country. These tensions could 
potentially undermine development gains, impact ongoing conflict dynamics and disrupt fragile 
peace processes. 
It is therefore important that federal government and federal states integrate climate risks 
and related adaptation responses into their security planning. Applying this principle means 
recognizing the potential conflict effects of climate change, and designing adaptation actions 
that actively seek to address these potential drivers of conflict. The adaptation actions 
identified and prioritized in the NAP must also be designed in a conflict-sensitive manner; that 
is, designed in such a way that they do not exacerbate tensions between or among communities 
(through, for example, the unfair distribution of adaptation benefits). Rather, they should seek to 
enhance peacebuilding opportunities where possible. This will require that they be designed with 
a thorough understanding of the local and national conflict context and its actors, dynamics 
and causes. 
Principle 5: Participatory, Inclusive and Transparent
Climate change affects all sectors, people and stakeholders in the country. It is therefore 
crucial that Somalia’s NAP process be participatory, inclusive and transparent. Stakeholders 
in the process should include the public (federal government institutions and federal member 
state institutions) and private sectors, academia, civil society (Indigenous communities, NGOs 
and more) and international cooperation organizations. The NAP process itself should be open, 
communicative and accountable to all stakeholders in Somalia.
Through this principle, all actors and their respective needs, interests and functions, should 
be reflected in defining Somalia’s concrete, high-priority medium- and long-term adaptation
=== PAGE 40 ===
31
Title
actions. Such an approach will contribute to the implementation and reach of adaptation 
actions by creating agreements and alliances between key stakeholders. Participation and 
transparency will also contribute to enhanced coordination and ownership over adaptation 
actions, and will help strengthen alignment with NDCs and other development plans. This will 
also result in the consolidation and participation of different cooperation agencies, NGOs 
and climate change projects to minimize duplication and identify financing opportunities for 
different priority actions. 
Principle 6: Guided by the Best Available Scientific 
Information and Traditional Knowledge
Successful adaptation not only depends on the active and sustained engagement of 
stakeholders but also on the effective management of knowledge. Due to Somalia’s recent 
history, there is a limited store of scientific knowledge and research specific to the country to 
help characterize the likely impacts of climate change (Federal Government of Somalia, 2013). 
The planning and implementation of adaptation actions is an iterative process that should be 
continuously informed by the best available scientific information (international, regional and 
national) on climate risks and vulnerability, recognizing that there will be uncertainties and 
limitations. 
Local communities have in-depth knowledge and experiences in coping with the effects 
of climate change to inform planning and adaptation initiatives. This local and traditional 
knowledge should complement existing and future scientific information to ensure that 
measures to build disaster and climate resilience promote the replication of effective practices, 
encourage autonomous innovation and, where appropriate, introduce external technology to 
help address new or magnified challenges. Strategies and programs should be monitored and 
evaluated to ensure that learning is captured and should be made publicly available to promote 
efficiency and effectiveness. 
Principle 7: Coordination and Avoiding Duplication
Climate action to date in Somalia has been largely characterized by a lack of proper 
coordination among actors at the federal and federal member state levels, often resulting in the 
duplication of efforts and weak results. Through the promotion of effective coordination and 
consultations, it is the country’s vision that the NAP process should aim to enhance existing 
situations and result in a more coherent climate change response with the participation of all 
stakeholders.
=== PAGE 41 ===
32
Title
6.0 Monitoring, Evaluation, 
and Learning
The regular progress monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of planned actions against their actual 
outcomes is important for an effective and sustainable Somalia NAP process. M&E can help 
practitioners determine if adaptation measures are achieving their aims, or have incurred 
any unanticipated side effects. More specifically, effective M&E is important for producing 
knowledge about the evolving adaptation context, needs and experiences and for reporting to 
stakeholders on progress and results. M&E also makes it possible to check whether a policy, plan 
or intervention is on track and, if not, to adjust the course of action accordingly (Price-Kelly et 
al, 2015). M&E should inform the development and the design of adaptation policies, programs 
and projects.
Somalia has no national monitoring and evaluation system in place for adaptation. M&E is 
mainly linked to specific projects under implementation. Therefore, establishing an M&E system 
is an important step towards a successful NAP process. The country’s M&E systems should 
support the generation of knowledge and information to support policy, promote sharing 
experiences and lessons learned, assess progress against planned adaptation targets and 
support the country’s reporting obligations under the UNFCCC and other international and 
regional processes.
As an essential step to building a climate change monitoring and evaluation system, the 
country, with support from Global Water Partnership (GWP), has recently developed a prototype 
online database platform on climate change, to be housed by DoECC. This will be accessible by 
sector agencies, state-level agencies, and other government stakeholders as well as the public 
to inform their respective climate change adaptation planning activities. The platform will also 
consolidate information on projects relevant to climate change adaptation that have been 
completed or are currently underway at all levels of government, including projects implemented 
by national and subnational NGOs. It is expected that the NAP Readiness Project will support 
the DoECC to build upon and further develop this tool to improve its functionality in tracking 
climate action, climate finance and the sustainable development benefits of climate actions.
The following are key elements of the monitoring and evaluation of the NAP process.
6.1 Establishment of an Online National Adaptation 
Monitoring and Evaluation System 
The country will need to establish a simple, implementable online M&E system for adaptation. 
Such a system will aim to capture the details of ongoing adaptation projects and initiatives 
and the results achieved, including on enhancing the adaptative capacities and building the 
resilience of society, the economy and the country’s ecosystems. The system should also be
=== PAGE 42 ===
33
Title
linked to the broader climate change tracking process and M&E of the NDP-9 and on national 
progress towards gender equality and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
The system will provide a platform for reporting on and tracking adaptation actions across 
the country by different actors. This needs to build on ongoing work under the Global Water 
Partnership (GWP), through which a prototype online tool has been developed. The tool has to 
be further refined to be fit for the purpose of the NAP process. 
6.2 Selection of Suitable Indicators 
An important aspect of the monitoring and evaluation of adaptation actions is to identify the 
indicators that need to be monitored. These indicators should be developed early in the NAP 
process, during the formation of a detailed adaptation plan, in order to ensure that the selected 
indicators are appropriate for measuring progress toward Somalia’s adaptation goals and the 
more specific progress on prioritized adaptation actions. Indicators should be linked to specific 
actions or objectives. It is important that they be considered during the preparation of the NAP 
and included as part of the plan. The indicators need to be achievable, realistic, time-bound 
and gender-responsive. The indicators are sector-specific while linking to the climate change 
challenge. The linkages to wider development and conflict management processes should be 
considered, for example by looking at the impact of conflict on NAP implementation and of the 
NAP on the conflict context (i.e. what is the impact of adaptation actions on peace and conflict 
indicators). 
6.3 Effective Climate Adaptation Coordination Structures 
An effective M&E system relies heavily on effective M&E institutions, including those in charge 
of coordination. The capacity of DoECC must be strengthened in order to manage the M&E 
arrangements for the NAP process while building a coordination platform to ensure all key 
players fully employ the system. The role of the NCCC in the M&E arrangements also needs to 
be clarified in order to enable officials to participate in the committee in a meaningful way. It is 
also important that M&E arrangements be established at the federal member state level, with 
clear links to the national M&E system established.
6.4 Process for regular reporting and guidelines
The M&E system will be most effective if it is backed by a strong legal framework. Somalia will 
need to develop legislation and regulations that require federal institutions, federal member 
states and non-state actors to annually report on their adaptation activities. The Directorate 
will need to further develop guidelines and templates to support effective reporting that feeds 
into the national M&E system. Capacity-building and awareness will be required to support the 
implementation and continual improvement of the M&E arrangements for the NAP process.
=== PAGE 43 ===
34
Title
7.0 Climate Finance Resource 
Mobilization
Somalia’s government structures are severely hindered by the lack of financial and human 
resources to implement adaptation actions. The key focus of the limited national public budget 
is on establishing and maintaining security and partly contributing to the payment of salaries of 
government staff. Whenever there are climate-related disasters, such as flooding and droughts, 
Somali-led entrepreneurs, diaspora members, religious scholars and the general public create ad 
hoc committees, often supported by the government, to mobilize and coordinate funding to help 
the disaster-affected communities in the country.
Somalia receives significant resources from development partners for climate change action 
and wider development projects. It is estimated that the country received US$2 billion in 
official development assistance (ODA) annually in 2017 and 2018. Together, the European Union, 
United Kingdom and Germany provided more than half of development aid in 2018 (US$454 
million). The United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union and Germany were the 
largest providers of humanitarian assistance, together providing 78% (US$883 million) of 
total humanitarian aid in 2018 (Federal Government of Somalia, 2019a). The Aid Information 
Management System (AIMS), launched in 2019, serves as a one-stop shop for information 
related to foreign assistance in Somalia. 
Somalia has a vibrant private sector, which plays an important role in the country’s response 
to climate change in sectors such as energy, agriculture, transportation, building, water, and 
disaster management and response. The private sector is largely unregulated and remains 
faced with key challenges, such as lack of information and awareness of climate change and 
the role they play in addressing it, a weak investment climate, continued insecurity, and lack 
of competitive commercial financing. These challenges will have to be addressed in order to 
mobilize further significant private-sector support for adaptation. 
The NAP process requires a dedicated resource mobilization strategy built on the following:
•	 Promoting enhanced access to climate finance from bilateral and multilateral channels, 
including through:
	°
Developing clear adaptation strategic priorities for implementation under the NAP; 
	°
Promoting sustained capacity development for enhanced climate finance access 
in the country for federal ministries, state government ministries and civil society 
organizations;
	°
Developing budgeted, fit-for-purpose concept notes and proposals that reflect 
adaptation priorities for submission to different development partners and funding 
channels.
=== PAGE 44 ===
35
Title
•	 Promotion of private sector investment in adaptation actions through:
	°
Increasing awareness among the private sector of existing adaptation investment 
opportunities and technologies;
	°
Developing a private-sector engagement strategy for the NAP and establishing 
appropriate institutional arrangements for enhanced private-sector engagement; 
	°
Enhancing the investment climate for the private sector through the development 
of supportive policy and legislative frameworks.
•	 Establishment of an effective national climate change fund, with a clear window for 
adaptation. The creation of a dedicated fund would be essential for Somalia to mobilize 
the necessary resources to implement its NDC and NAP. This has a number of advantages, 
relative to channeling resources through the budgetary process; the fund would have more 
clarity of purpose, and would allow for the development of increased national expertise 
and transparency on climate financing over time. Having a fully operational national-level 
fund could also pave the way for similar state-level climate change funds, where member 
states will be able to mobilize resources for the implementation of adaptation actions 
within their jurisdictions. The fund’s structure and operation would be established through 
consultative, inclusive processes and would be guided by Somalia’s specific context under 
the UNDP’s NAP Readiness Project.
Weak institutional arrangements for adaptation response remains an impediment to resource 
mobilization and implementation of the country’s NAP. It is important that key partners support 
the government in addressing its capacity bottlenecks, both at the federal level and member 
state levels. The objective of institutional capacity development should be to promote: 
•	 effective and efficient climate change governance arrangements with high-level oversight 
and policy guidance; 
•	 climate change mainstreaming across government; 
•	 enforcement and compliance capability; 
•	 state-level government involvement; and 
•	 the provision of highly specialized technical experts. 
It is also important that the key climate change coordination structures proposed in the climate 
change policy be operationalized within the shortest time possible. Capacity development 
measures should in part focus on how to fully mainstream climate change into development 
(including peacebuilding) planning and budgetary processes as well as measures to improve the 
operational and absorptive capacity of climate change funds through projects implemented by 
the government and other players.
=== PAGE 45 ===
36
Title
8.0 Next Steps and Milestones
Somalia’s NAP process is being initiated through the GCF-funded NAP Readiness Project, 
which is in the early stages of implementation. Moving forward, the country will undertake 
the following steps to advance the NAP process including as informed by the NAP Readiness 
Project proposal. 
NAP LAUNCH AND AWARENESS-RAISING 
The government will develop information and outreach materials to familiarize government 
stakeholders with the NAP process. Key among the actions will include holding launch 
workshops and consultative meetings to raise awareness about the country’s NAP process. 
This will facilitate the engagement of a wide range of stakeholders in the process. Stakeholders 
to be engaged include federal-level government institutions, federal member states, private-
sector actors, civil-society actors and academia, among others.
STOCKTAKING 
The government and its partners will work to take stock of available information on climate 
change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation, and to assess any gaps and needs that must be 
addressed in order to establish an enabling environment for the NAP process. This will involve 
the collation of information on adaptation actions by different actors to identify the achieved 
results, challenges, opportunities for upscaling and lessons learned.
CAPACITY ASSESSMENT FOR THE NAP PROCESS
Weak institutional arrangements for climate change response remain an impediment to the 
NAP process. The first step towards addressing the capacity bottlenecks is the assessment 
of the capacity needs of all relevant institutions, including the DoECC, relevant federal sector 
ministries and institutions, and state-level departments responsible for climate change 
matters. Capacity development measures should address any gaps, including capacities to 
fully mainstream climate change adaptation into planning and budgetary processes as well as 
measures to improve the operational and absorptive capacity of climate change funds through 
projects implemented by the government and other players.
ESTABLISHMENT OF EFFECTIVE CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION COORDINATION 
MECHANISMS 
The DoECC will lead the NAP process in the country. However, the coordination mechanism in 
place for adaptation planning needs to be strengthened. In order to ensure effective planning, 
implementation and tracking of adaptation actions, the DoECC needs to have effective 
operational structures to lead the NAP Process. The NAP Readiness Project will provide 
interim arrangements at the DoECC to support in this role; these should be made permanent. 
Additionally, technical and high-level adaptation steering committees should be established
=== PAGE 46 ===
37
Title
to lead the NAP process and help facilitate multisectoral coordination, with representation 
from government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, state governments, development partners and the 
private sector. State governments can nominate representatives. The steering committees 
should be convened quarterly and should oversee and direct the process of compiling the 
National Adaptation Plan. The steering committees will also be responsible for coordinating 
with development partners to ensure that the NAP process is aligned with current and ongoing 
initiatives and to identify points of entry and synergy. 
CLARIFICATION AND FORMALIZATION OF THE ROLES OF FEDERAL, STATE AND DISTRICT 
GOVERNMENTS AND ALIGN STATE PROCESSES
To improve federal-state coordination on the formulation and implementation of policies, 
strategies, plans, projects and programs related to climate change adaptation, the NAP 
Readiness Project will support the establishment of a detailed framework of roles and 
responsibilities for federal, state and district governments that is consistent with the 
formalized division of powers in Somalia. DoECC will undertake a technical review of adaptation 
governance arrangements in other federal states to identify best practices. Recommendations 
will be presented at a national workshop for Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and Federal 
Member States (FMSs) stakeholders, where a draft framework for NAP coordination will be 
agreed. The activity will also develop guidance for state-level governments to encourage the 
alignment of state-level priorities with those of the FGS, as well as guidelines for promoting 
consistency across states with respect to planning and coordination at the state level. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL ADAPTATION PLAN (NAP) 
This action is planned under the NAP Readiness Project. This will focus preparation of a detailed 
NAP document for Somalia that will include, among other aspects, vulnerability assessment, 
identification of adaptation priorities, and draft adaptation concept notes tied to the priorities. 
The document is also expected to support formalizing federal agencies’ institutional roles and 
responsibilities with respect to climate change adaptation at the national level and clarify the 
scope, objectives and timeline for the process. DoECC will receive technical support to conduct 
an institutional review at the federal level, which will provide recommendations for establishing 
the adaptation plan. The institutional review will examine laws, policies, strategies and other 
relevant frameworks related to climate change adaptation and associated governance issues. 
The review will build on recommendations of the National Climate Change Policy, National 
Environment Policy, and Somalia’s First National Communication to the UNFCCC, among others 
(Federal Government of Somalia, 2020a, 2019d, 2018). Subsequently, a national workshop will be 
held with government and non-government stakeholders and development partner observers to 
finalize a draft plan for climate change adaptation.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION TRAINING PROGRAM 
For an effective NAP process, there is need to develop and deliver a series of training modules 
and supporting materials (e.g. instructional resources, workbooks, exercises) specifically geared 
towards federal-level agency staff to create a common understanding of the challenges 
of climate change across sectors. These materials will need to be developed in the Somali 
language in collaboration with international experts and the university partners. The training 
modules will be developed on a quarterly basis and used to equip this cohort over the life of the
=== PAGE 47 ===
38
Title
Readiness project, beginning with a basic level of climate change awareness and progressing 
through more specific content to build the cohort’s skills. The training of trainers (ToT) should be 
undertaken and academia should be engaged to enable the delivery of materials on an ongoing 
basis beyond the NAP Readiness Project. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR 
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
The government will aim to establish a platform to provide climate change information, 
projections and other data, which will be accessible to sector agencies, state-level agencies 
and other government stakeholders, as well as to the general public, to inform climate change 
adaptation planning activities. The platform will also consolidate information on projects 
related to climate change adaptation that have been completed or are currently underway at 
all levels of government, including projects implemented by national and subnational NGOs, 
to develop a database from which planning and implementation lessons can be drawn. The 
starting point for developing this platform is the online information management system on 
adaptation, developed as part of Global Water Partnership’s supported adaptation baseline 
2021(Federal Government of Somalia 2021a). The online tool, to be hosted and managed by 
DoECC, will provide relevant climate information to be used for adaptation planning. It is thus 
essential that the NAP Readiness Project support the DoECC in building upon and further 
developing this tool to improve its functionality in tracking climate action, climate finance and 
the sustainable development benefits of climate actions. The project should also support the 
training of relevant experts and departments in using the tool. The enhanced, robust, simple 
and implementable tool should serve as a comprehensive domestic monitoring, reporting and 
verification system for climate action in Somalia.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GUIDELINES AND METHODOLOGY FOR VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS
The DoECC will need to be provided with technical support to develop a standardized 
methodology for conducting vulnerability assessments at the federal and state level. The 
vulnerability assessments should cover the priority sectors identified by the FGS and FMS, 
including land use, agriculture, water, food security, DRR, marine and coastal resources, health 
and biodiversity. The decision on which sectors to concentrate the vulnerability assessments on 
will require discussions between the federal and state governments. 
DEVELOPMENT OF CLIMATE CHANGE LEGISLATION 
Given the cross-cutting nature of climate change, comprehensive policy and legislation 
frameworks are needed to guide the NAP process and establish the necessary institutional 
structures at both the federal and member state levels. At the federal level, climate change 
legislation is required in order to support implementation of the Climate Change Policy. To 
promote the mainstreaming of climate actions across the country and facilitate the transition 
from adaptation planning to implementation, there is need for strong climate change policies 
and legislative frameworks at the state level. 
UNDERTAKING OF MEASURES TO PROMOTE GENDER MAINSTREAMING
In order to promote an inclusive and gender-responsive NAP process, an in-depth gender 
analysis should be undertaken. This is the first step towards gender mainstreaming, through
=== PAGE 48 ===
39
Title
assessing the complexity of the climate change challenge and the different ways in which it 
affects men and women, with the aim of refining and informing a NAP process that is gender-
responsive and transformational in nature. The analysis should assess the extent to which 
gender issues should be considered within the sectors, including from policy, legal, institutional 
and implementation perspectives. Further, it should identify challenges for the empowerment 
and participation of women and other vulnerable groups in climate change decision-making, 
their contributions to sectoral adaptation targets, existing gaps in resources, and the 
opportunities for policy articulation to strengthen the integration of gender equality into NAP 
processes. Through the NAP Readiness Project, capacity strengthening support will be provided 
through workshops. As well, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development (MoWHRD) 
will be supported through the Project to develop a manual on gender integration into climate 
change adaptation.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIVATE-SECTOR ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY AND PLATFORM  
The engagement of the private sector in climate change adaptation in Somalia is critical to the 
effectiveness of the NAP process. The government should develop a private-sector engagement 
strategy for its NAP, and establish a private-sector coordination platform to help increase the 
engagement of these actors in the process. Both should be established through a consultative 
process. The platform should support the coordination of climate adaptation actions by the 
private sector and work to address barriers to private-sector investment in climate change 
adaptation. 
DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCE MOBILIZATION STRATEGY 
The NAP coordinating entity will need to spearhead the development of a NAP resource 
mobilization strategy to implement the adaptation actions. The strategy will be developed 
through a consultative process with relevant government stakeholders, private-sector actors, 
civil society actors and development partners. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF A CLIMATE FINANCE COORDINATION MECHANISM 
A national-level working group will need to be established and convened to coordinate financial 
planning for climate change adaptation. The working group will include representation from 
the DoECC, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic 
Development, focal points for various climate funds, development partners, the private sector 
and other stakeholders. The working group will receive technical support from an international 
consultant specializing in climate change adaptation finance. The coordination mechanism 
will include vertical coordination between the FMS and FGS, which will contribute to the 
implementation of prioritized adaptation options. The NAP project will support establishment 
and convening the working group semi-annually and capacity building workshops. Additionally, 
to support climate finance tracking and coordination, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) will provide 
technical support to develop a climate change adaptation budget-tagging procedure to 
monitor existing and future expenditures on climate change. 
DESIGN OF A SOMALIA CLIMATE FUND
A National Climate Fund should be designed to serve as a mechanism through which climate 
finance can be channeled to state governments to support the implementation of fundable
=== PAGE 49 ===
40
Title
adaptation priorities. The development process will include a review of existing funds in 
other countries to identify best practices, enabling conditions and possible institutional 
arrangements to manage and disburse the fund. Based on this review, a technical expert 
will design a blueprint for a national-level fund with recommendations for institutional 
arrangements, access procedures and trustees.
ESTABLISHMENT OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION INDICATORS AND METHODOLOGIES 
FOR CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
The NAP Readiness Project will provide technical support to the DoECC for developing a set 
of indicators and methodologies for gathering data for monitoring the physical processes and 
impacts of climate change, as well as for evaluating the progress of climate change adaptation 
projects and programs. A baseline report will be prepared, highlighting a set of indicators for 
tracking climate action. The Readiness Project should build on these indicators as the country 
plans to establish robust NAP monitoring and evaluation processes. 
INCORPORATION OF NAP INTO DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND PEACEBUILDING PROCESSES 
Through close collaboration with responsible federal ministries and state-level governments, the 
DoECC will aim to ensure that the NAP is integrated into both development and peacebuilding 
processes, and that these processes are well reflected in the NAP. This will include ensuring 
that climate adaptation priorities are incorporated into subsequent iterations of the country’s 
National Development Plan and peacebuilding initiatives. It will also involve providing guidance 
to federal member states to incorporate adaptation into development and peacebuilding plans.
=== PAGE 50 ===
41
Title
References 
Coning, C. H., Grand, A. O., Karlsrud, J., Nortvedt, J., Yaw Tchie, A. E., Krampe, F. & Tarif, K. (2021). 
Climate, peace and security fact sheet: Somalia. Norwegian Institute of International 
Affairs. https://www.nupi.no/en/News/Climate-Peace-and-Security-Fact-Sheet-Somalia 
Crawford, A. & Church, C. (2020). The NAP process and peacebuilding: Briefing note. 
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD). https://www.iisd.org/publications/
nap-process-peacebuilding 
Dazé, A., Price-Kelly, H. & Rass, N. (2016). Vertical integration in National Adaptation Plan (NAP) 
processes: A guidance note for linking national and sub-national adaptation processes. 
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD). https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/Vertical-Integration-in-NAP-Processes-Guidance-Note.pdf 
Eklöw, K., & Krampe, F. (2019). Climate-related security risks and peacebuilding in Somalia. 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). https://www.sipri.org/
publications/2019/sipri-policy-papers/climate-related-security-risks-and-peacebuilding-
somalia 
Federal Government of Somalia (2013). The National Adaptation Programme of Action Somalia 
– 2013. 
Federal Government of Somalia (2015a). Somalia’s Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions to the UNFCCC.
Federal Government of Somalia (2015b). Somalia’s National Biodiversity Strategy and Action 
Plan (NBSAP)
Federal Government of Somalia(2015c) Wadajir Framework for Local Governance 
Federal Government of Somalia (2017a). National Capacity Self-Assessment towards 
implementing Rio Conventions
Federal Government of Somalia (2017b). National Development Plan (NDP-8) (2017–2019).
Federal Government of Somalia (2018a). The initial national communication for Somalia to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
Federal Government of Somalia (2018b). Somalia drought impact needs assessment report.
Federal Government of Somalia (2018c). Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework
Federal Government of Somalia (2018d). Somali National Disaster Management Policy 
Federal Government of Somalia (2018 e). draft National Gender Policy 
Federal Government of Somalia (2018f). National Energy Policy  
Federal Government of Somalia(2018g). Stabilization Strategy 2018-2020, Version 2.0 Updated 
September 2018 Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and Federal Member 
States 
Federal Government of Somalia (2019a). Aid flows in Somalia. http://mop.gov.so/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/Aid-Flows-in-Somalia-2019-ENGLISH.pdf
Federal Government of Somalia (2019b). Draft Somalia livestock sector development strategy.
=== PAGE 51 ===
42
Title
Federal Government of Somalia (2019c). National irrigation policy 2019.
Federal Government of Somalia (2019d) National Environment Policy 
Federal Government of Somalia (2019e). National Reconciliation Framework (NRF) Ministry of 
Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation 
Federal Government of Somalia (2020a). National climate change policy, 2020. 
Federal Government of Somalia (2020b). National Development Plan (NDP-9) (2020–2024). 
Federal Government of Somalia (2020c). Somalia’s Integrated Water Resources Management 
Strategy 
Federal Government of Somalia (2020d). National Voluntary Land Degradation Neutrality 
Targets (LDN), 
Federal Government of Somalia(2020e). Somalia Food and Nutrition Security Strategy
Federal Government of Somalia (2020f). Draft Charcoal Policy
Federal Government of Somalia (2020g). Draft Gender Policy
Federal Government of Somalia (2021a). National adaptation baseline report 2020.
Federal Government of Somalia (2021b). Somalia’s updated Nationally Determined 
Contributions under the Paris Agreement to the UNFCCC.
Federal Government of Somalia (2021) Draft National Environment Strategy and Action Plan 
(NESAP)
Green Climate Fund (GCF) (2019). Readiness proposal with United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) for Somali Republic. https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/files/
document/readiness-proposals-somalia-undp-adaptation-planning_0.pdf 
Hammill, A., Dazé, A. & Dekens, J. (2019). The NAP (National Adaptation Plan) process: 
Frequently asked questions. NAP Global Network. https://napglobalnetwork.org/2019/12/
the-national-adaptation-plan-nap-process-frequently-asked-questions/ 
Huyer, S. (2016). Gender equality in national climate actions: Planning for gender-responsive 
Nationally Determined Contributions. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
https://www.undp.org/publications/gender-equality-national-climate-action-planning-
gender-responsive-nationally 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2014). Fifth assessment report. https://
www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar5/ 
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) (2016). Vertical integration in 
National Adaptation Plan (NAP) processes: A guidance note for linking national and sub-
national adaptations. https://napglobalnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Vertical-
Integration-in-NAP-Processes-Guidance-Note.pdf
Least Developed Countries (LDC) Expert Group (LEG) (2012). National Adaptation Plans: 
Technical guidelines for the national adaptation plan process. United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NAPC/Guidelines/
Pages/Technical-guidelines.aspx 
NAP Global Network (n.d.). Gender. https://napglobalnetwork.org/themes/gender/
=== PAGE 52 ===
43
Title
Ogallo, L. A., Omondi, P. O., Ouma, G., & Wayumba, G. (2018). Climate change projections and the 
associated potential impacts for Somalia. American Journal of Climate Change 7(2): 153–
170. DOI: 10.4236/ajcc.2018.72011. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325201230_
Climate_Change_Projections_and_the_Associated_Potential_Impacts_for_Somalia
Parry, M. L., Canziani, O. F., Palutikof, J. P., van der Linden, P. J., & Hanson, C. E. (eds). (2007). 
Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
2007. Cambridge University Press. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/wg2/
Price-Kelly, H., Hammill, A., Dekens, J., Leiter, T. & Olivier, J. (2015). Developing national 
adaptation monitoring and evaluation systems: A guidebook. GIZ. International Institute 
for Sustainable Development (IISD). https://www.iisd.org/publications/developing-national-
adaptation-monitoring-and-evaluation-systems-guidebook 
UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia (2017). Gender equality: Glossary of terms and concepts. 
https://www.unicef.org/rosa/media/1761/file/Gender%20glossary%20of%20terms%20
and%20concepts%20.pdf
United Nations (1992). United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Somalia (n.d.). Gender in Somalia: Brief. 
https://www1.undp.org/content/dam/somalia/docs/Project_Documents/Womens_
Empowerment/Gender%20in%20Somalia%20FINAL.pdf  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (n.d.a). Introduction to 
climate finance. https://unfccc.int/topics/climate-finance/the-big-picture/introduction-to-
climate-finance
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (n.d.b). NDC spotlight. 
https://unfccc.int/process/the-paris-agreement/nationally-determined-contributions/ndc-
spotlight
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (n.d.c). What do 
adaptation to climate change and climate resilience mean?
United Nations Somalia (2020a). UN Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (2021–
2025)
United Nations (2018). UN Somalia Gender Equality Strategy 2018-2020   https://somalia.
un.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/un_somalia_gender_equality_strategy2_0.pdf
United Nations Somalia (2020b). Somalia COVID-19 Country Preparedness and Response Plan 
(CPRP)  
World Bank Climate Knowledge Portal—Somalia  https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/
country/somalia
World Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2018). 
Rebuilding resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia
=== PAGE 53 ===

