=== PAGE 1 ===
1 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND AUDIT 
REGULATIONS (ESIA) 2024
=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS 
PART I: PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS 
1. Acronyms and Abbreviations 
2. Citation 
3. Interpretation 
4. Application of these Regulations 
5. Purpose of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Regulations 
6. Cost of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
7. Responsibilities 
 
PART II: PROJECT BRIEF 
 
8. Development of Project Brief and Term of Reference 
9. Request for comments on the project Brief 
10. Record of decision on the Project Brief 
PART III: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY 
 
11. Scoping and formulation of terms of reference for Environmental and Social Impact 
study 
12. Team of experts to undertake Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study 
13. Developing Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report. 
14. Public participation 
15. Submission of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report 
16. Review of the Environmental and Social Impact Study 
17. Invitation of comments from the general public 
18. Review of comments from the general public 
19. Basis of Decision making of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment licence 
20. Decision of the Ministry 
21. Conditions of approval of a project 
22. Cancellation of approval 
PART IV - STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT (SESA) 
 
23. Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) Study 
24. Submission of the Policy, Plan or Programme brief by the Proponent 
25. submission and approval of the scoping report 
26. Development of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report 
27. Consultation and Public Participation 
28. Submission of draft Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report 
29. Invitation of comments on the draft Strategic Environment and Social Assessment 
report 
30. Incorporation of comments in the draft Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
report 
31. Submission of the final Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment Report 
32. Record of Decision on Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment study 
33. Monitoring and Evaluation of Policy, Plan or Programme
=== PAGE 3 ===
3 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
PART V: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL AUDIT 
34. Environmental and Social Auditors 
35. Fundamental principles of Environmental and Social Audit 
36. Environmental and Social Audits 
37. Preparation of Environmental and Social Audit report. 
38. Undertaking Environmental and Social Impact Audit 
39. Submission of Environmental and Social Audit report 
40. Control Environmental and Social Audit 
41. Post Audit Order 
42. Inspection 
43. Environmental and Social Monitoring by the Federal Level Taskforce 
44. Monitoring Report 
 
PART VI: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
45. Transboundary ESIA issues 
46. Access to Information and Issues of Confidentiality 
47. Registration of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Experts 
48. Environmental and Social Assessment Expert Licence 
49. Code of Conduct for ESIA Experts 
50. Effect of approval or rejection of project. 
51. Offences. 
52. Appeals 
53. Registers 
54. Roles of MOECC and FMS Ministries of Environment in enforcing the regulations 
55. Transfer or delegation of functions 
 
 
SCHEDULES 
FIRST SCHEDULE: APPLICABLE PROJECTS 
Project Type A: Projects requiring Full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study 
Project Type B: Medium and Small Risk projects requiring Project Brief 
 
 
SECOND SCHEDULE:ESIA FORMS 
Form 1: Application for Environmental Impact Assessment Licence 
Form 2: Environmental Impact Assessment Licence 
Form 3: Application for licence to practice as an Environmental and Social Assessment 
expert 
Form 4: Certificate of practice of an Environmental and Social Assessment expert 
Form 5: Certificate of Environmental and Social Compliance
=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Form 6: Notice to the public to submit comments on an Environmental and Social 
Assessment Study Report 
 
THIRD SCHEDULE: GENERAL ESIA GUIDELINES 
Project Brief Template 
Terms of reference for Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Study 
Content of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) Study 
Content of Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
Content of an Environmental and Social Audit Report 
 
 
FOURTH SCHEDULE: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS ASSESSMENT EXPERTS 
Qualifications for Environmental and Social Assessment Experts 
Code of Conduct of Practitioners Registered under the Act 
Form 7: Register of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments/Audits experts
=== PAGE 5 ===
5 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
PART I: PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS 
 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AIA: 
Archaeological Impact Assessment 
MOECC: Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
ESIA: 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
EA: 
Environmental Audit 
ESMP: 
Environmental And Social Management Plan 
FGS: 
Federal Government Of Somalia 
FMS: 
Federal Member State 
M& E: 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MW: 
Megawatt 
SESA: 
Strategic Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ToRs: 
Terms of Reference 
 
1. Citation 
 
These Regulations may be cited as the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Regulations, 2024 
2. Interpretation 
 
In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires: 
 
“Act” means the Environment Protection and Management Act 2024; 
 
“Analysis” means the testing or examination of any matter, substance or process for the 
purpose of determining its composition or qualities or its effect on any segment of the 
environment or examination of emissions or recording of noise or sub-sonic vibrations to 
determine the level or other characteristics of the noise or sub-sonic vibration or its effect on 
any segments of the environment; 
 
“Alternative” means different means of meeting the general purpose and requirements of an 
activity, which may include: location, type of activity, design/layout, technology, activities, 
materials etc; 
 
“Ministry’’ means the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change of the Federal Republic 
of Somalia; 
 
“Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report" means the report produced 
at the end of the environmental and social impact assessment study process under section 56 
of the Act and these Regulations; 
 
"Environmental Management" includes the protection, conservation and sustainable use of 
the various elements or components of the environment;
=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
"Environmental and Social Management Plan" means all details of project activities, 
impacts, mitigation measures, time schedule, costs, responsibilities and commitments 
proposed to minimize environmental and social impacts of all phases of a project; 
 
"Lead Agency" means any Government ministry, department, or parastatal or in which any 
law vests functions of control or management of the environment and social issues. 
 
"Mitigation 
Measures" 
include 
engineering 
works, 
technological 
improvements, 
management and ways and means of minimizing negative aspects, which may include socio- 
economic and cultural losses suffered by communities and individuals, whilst enhancing 
positive aspects of the project; 
 
“No-project Option” means the alternative of not implementing the project or activity; 
 
“Programme” means a coherent, organized agenda or schedule of commitments, proposals, 
instruments, and /or activities that elaborate and implement policy” 
 
“Precautionary Principle” is the principle that where there are threats of damage to the 
environment, whether serious or irreversible, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used 
as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation; 
 
"Project" means site specific activity or undertaking, including those arising from policies, 
plans and programmes which may have an impact on the environment; 
 
"Proponent" means a person proposing or executing a project, programme or an undertaking 
specified in the First Schedule of these regulations; 
 
“Record” includes any correspondence, memorandum, book, plan, map, drawing, diagram, 
pictorial or graphic work, photograph, film, microform, sound recording, videotape, machine 
readable record, and other documentary material, regardless of physical form or 
characteristic, and any copy thereof; 
 
"Review" means a process of checking the adequacy of an environmental and social impact 
assessment study to ensure that it meets the legal requirements and ensure wide acceptance of 
the environmental and social impact study findings; 
 
“Screening” means the first stage of the environmental and social assessment process, and is 
used to determine which projects, policies, plans or programmes need to be subjected to 
environmental and social assessment scrutiny that is required; 
 
“Screening Report” means a report that summarizes the results of a screening; 
 
"Social Analysis" means assessing or estimating in advance the social consequences from 
specific policy actions or project development including social justice and equity, social 
uncertainty, social cohesion, social networks and interactions, social status and gender 
desegregation;
=== PAGE 7 ===
7 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
"Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment" means a range of analytical and 
participatory approaches that aim to integrate environmental and social considerations into 
policies, plans, and programs and evaluate the inter-linkages with economic and social 
considerations. 
 
“Sustainable Development” means development that meets the needs of the present, 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs; 
 
"Trans-boundary Impacts" means impacts beyond the Somali borders; 
 
3. Application 
 
1) These regulations shall apply- 
 
a) to all projects included in Article 57 to the Act; 
b) to all projects included in First Schedule to these Regulations; 
c) to any major repairs, extensions, alterations or non- routine maintenance or any 
existing project which is included in Article 57 the Act and these regulations. 
 
2) No proponent shall implement a project for which approval is required under the 
Environmental Management Act and under these regulations unless the environmental and 
social impact assessment has been concluded in accordance with these regulations. 
 
3) An inspector may at all reasonable times, enter on any land, premises, or other facilities to 
determine whether a project has complied with the requirements for environmental and social 
impact assessment under the Act. 
 
4. Purpose of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Regulations 
 
The purpose of these Regulations is to regulate the procedure and criteria as contemplated in 
Article 8 of the Act relating to the preparation, evaluation, submission, processing and 
consideration of, and decision on, applications for environmental authorisations for the 
commencement of activities, subjected to environmental and social impact assessment, in 
order to avoid or mitigate detrimental impacts on the environment and society, and to 
optimise positive impacts, and for matters pertaining thereto. 
 
5. Cost of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments 
 
(1) The application and processing fee, the study and cost of consulting the public and 
providing documents required during the study, review and any other stage of the 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment process shall be borne by the developer. 
 
(2) The Ministry and Federal Member States Ministry of Environment may at the expense of 
the developer, carry out studies that are outside of its public service role to complement the 
study, or generate information and data.
=== PAGE 8 ===
8 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
6. Responsibilities 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Climate Change- (the Ministry) shall co-ordinate, 
administer and supervise the Environment and Social Impact Assessment and Audit 
processes for high risk and transboundary projects and in particular- 
 
a) carry out the screening of proposed project; 
b) decide on the appropriate means of public information and participation; 
c) co-ordinate public hearings where required; 
d) grant environmental and social impact Assessment approval or reject project; 
e) carry out periodic audits of approved high-risk project; and advise the developer on 
remedial measures in cases of non-compliance with previously determined measures; 
 
Federal Member States Ministry of Environment shall co-ordinate, administer and 
supervise ESIA and audit process at the State level and in particular- 
 
(a) Receive project briefs for low and medium risk projects 
(b) co-ordinate public hearings where required 
(c) Grant approval or reject project briefs that do not meet the standards 
(d) Decide if a proposed project needs a full ESIA study not a project brief due to its 
impact on the environment 
 
The Lead Agency shall co-operate with the Authority in the Environment and Social Impact 
Assessment process (Federal and State levels) and shall in particular be responsible to- 
 
a) inform a developer on the requirement for an Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment to be conducted; 
b) guide the developer on providing the appropriate information for the execution of the 
screening process; and 
c) refuse permission for the carrying out of any project prior to the granting of ESIA 
approval through the Authority. 
Developer shall- 
 
a) provide the appropriate information as is required for the initial screening of the proposed 
project; 
b) attend the scoping meeting; 
c) provide documents for official and public scrutiny; 
d) provide, at any stage of the project, for early public information according to the advice 
of the Authority on the appropriate means take the required arrangement for public 
consultation;
=== PAGE 9 ===
9 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Taskforce 
 
The Ministry shall annually establish Federal level Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment Taskforce. The taskforce will have representation from relevant government 
institutions, civil society organisations and private sector. 
 
The Federal level Environmental Impact Assessment taskforce on Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment shall advise the Ministry on technical issues relating to the 
carrying out of environmental and impact assessments as required under the Act, and other 
relevant laws, and its specific shall include: 
 
a) reviewing and advising on the implementation procedures for environmental and social 
impact assessment and making recommendations to the Ministry; 
b) reviewing and recommending guidelines to be issued by the Ministry to developers; 
c) reviewing and advising on the environmental and social impact studies, and audit reports; 
d) considering potential conflicts that might arise through competing requirements for 
environmental resources; 
e) recommending priority environmental and social controls, and management measures to 
be put in place during implementation of proposed projects; 
f) advising on harmonization of environmental and social impact assessment policy with 
sectoral policies on natural resources and environment; 
g) advising and recommending mechanisms for ensuring effective communication of 
environmental and social concerns associated with development projects in order to 
promote multi-sectoral and public participation in implementation of environmental 
policy; 
h) participating in public hearing related to adoption or modification of Somalia’s 
environmental and social impact assessment process; and advising The Authority on any 
other issues related to environmental impact assessments 
i) The taskforce shall prepare and submit to the Ministry annual reports on its activities. 
j) The meetings of the Taskforce, which shall be held whenever necessary, shall be arranged 
in consultation with and facilitated by the Ministry. 
k) The taskforce may co-opt any member of the staff of the Ministry or any other person 
whom the taskforce deems necessary for its proper functioning. 
 
 
FMS may establish an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment committee to 
support its responsibilities of the clearing Project briefs and providing necessary 
recommendations or conditions for implementation of low/medium risk projects under these 
regulations. 
 
 
PART II - THE PROJECT BRIEF 
 
7. Development and submission of Project brief
=== PAGE 10 ===
10 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(1) Every proponent undertaking a project listed in Type B being low risk and medium risk 
projects of the First Schedule of these regulations shall prepare a project brief and submit to 
the FMS Minister in charge of environment. The Project brief template under the Third 
Schedule to these regulations shall be used. 
 
(2) In preparing a project brief, the proponent shall hold at least one public meeting with the 
affected parties and communities including the women, youth, persons with disability and 
other vulnerable groups to explain the project, its social, economic and environmental 
impacts, and to receive oral or written comments on the proposed project and shall attach 
evidence of such public participation in the project report through signed attendance register, 
minutes and photographs. A notice of the meeting shall be communicated at least seven (7) 
days before the actual meeting date; 
 
(3) A project brief shall be prepared by an environmental and social assessment expert(s) 
registered as such under these Regulations. 
 
(4) An application for an environmental and social impact assessment licence shall be in 
Form 1 as set out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations and the applicant shall submit 
to the Authority the application together with at least three (3) printed copies and an 
electronic copy of the Project brief or as the Authority may prescribe from time to time. 
 
8. Request for comments on the project Brief 
 
(1) Where the project brief confirms to the requirements of Regulations, the State Minister 
shall within five (5) days upon receipt of the project report, dispatch a copy of the project 
brief to the following in order to receive written comments within fourteen (14) days working 
counting from the day of receipt of the project report.; 
 
a) Each of the relevant State Lead Agencies; 
b) Relevant Environmental and Social Impact Assessment committee where 
applicable. 
 
(2) On receipt of the comments referred to in sub-Regulation 9 (1) above or where no 
comments have been received by the end of the period of twenty-one (21) days from the date 
of receipt of the project report, the State Minister shall proceed to determine the project brief. 
 
9. Record of decision on the Project brief 
(l) On determination of the project brief, the decision of the State Minister, together with the 
reasons thereof, shall be communicated to the proponent within thirty (30) days of the 
submission of the project brief. 
(2) The Authority shall screen the Project brief guided by screening criteria set out in the 
Third Schedule to these Regulations. 
(3) After screening under regulations, the State Minister shall issue a formal communication 
indicating whether the proposed project:
=== PAGE 11 ===
11 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
a) requires the submission of an Environmental and Social Impact Study (under Part III 
of these regulations) and as such refer such project to the Ministry; 
b) requires the submission of additional information; 
c) is approved and licence issued; where the Project will have no significant impact on 
the environment, or that the project brief discloses sufficient mitigation measures 
d) is rejected- If the State Minister finds that the project will have a significant 
irreversible environmental and social impacts or there is non-conformity with existing 
policy or laws and proponent is expected to consider other suitable alternatives. 
 
(4) A proponent, who is dissatisfied with the State Minister’s decision to reject the 
application for a project brief, may within forty-five (45) days of the State Minister’s decision 
appeal against the decision in line with sub-regulation 51. 
 
 
PART III: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDY 
 
 
10. Scoping and formulation of terms of reference for Environmental and Social 
Impact Study 
 
(1) An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study shall be conducted for all high- 
risk projects listed under Project type ‘A’ under the First Schedule of the regulations. 
 
(2) The proponent shall engage a ESIA Expert team to undertake ESIA including scoping 
report and terms of reference developed in consultation with the Ministry prior to 
commencement of the ESIA. 
 
(3) A scoping report shall spell out the scope or extent of the Environmental Social Impact 
study to be carried out by the developer, and shall include a draft term of reference, which 
shall indicate the essential issues to be addressed in the environmental and social impact 
study report. 
 
(4) The terms of reference for the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study 
referred to above shall be at minimum be in accordance with the criteria set out in Third 
Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
11. Team of experts to undertake Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
study 
 
(1) A proponent shall, upon approval of the scoping report and the Terms of Reference, 
constitute a competent team of registered environmental and social assessment experts 
authorized in accordance with the Regulations set out in the Fifth Schedule to undertake the 
ESIA. 
 
(2) Every Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study shall be supervised by a lead 
expert registered in accordance with the criteria specified in the Fifth Schedule to these
=== PAGE 12 ===
12 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Regulations. 
 
(3) A person undertaking an ESIA study shall conduct themselves in accordance with the 
code of practice as contained in the Fifth Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
12. Developing Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report. 
 
(1) An ESIA study report prepared under these Regulations shall take into account inter alia 
environmental, social, cultural, economic, legal, safety and health consideration. 
 
(2) The content of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report should 
minimum comply with the ESIA contents set out in the Third Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
13. Public participation 
 
(1) During the process of conducting the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study, 
the proponent shall, seek the views of persons who may be affected by the project by: 
 
(a) holding at least three (3) public meeting or such number as determined in the approved 
terms of reference under these regulations, with the affected parties and communities 
including the youth, persons with disability and other vulnerable groups in a venue 
convenient and accessible, and a language understandable by the various stakeholders to 
explain the project and its effects and to receive their oral or written comments; 
 
(b) ensuring that appropriate notices indicating the dates, times and venues of the meetings, 
are publicized to the affected communities and the other concerned parties at least fourteen 
(14) days prior to the meetings referred to in (a) above. 
 
(c) Posting posters in strategic public places and in the vicinity of the site of the proposed 
project informing the affected parties and communities of the proposed project. 
 
(d) Ensuring that the reports of the public meetings are annexed to Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment study report. 
 
14. Submission of the Environmental and Social Impact Study 
(1) The project proponent shall submit five (5) copies of the draft environmental and social 
impact study to the Ministry for initial internal review to ascertain whether it is suitable 
for wider public review. 
 
15. Review of the Environmental and Social Impact Study 
 
(1) The Ministry shall review the draft environmental and social impact study and provide 
the project proponent with written comments within thirty (30) days of its receipt. 
 
(2) If after review of the draft environmental social impact study and the Ministry is satisfied 
that it is complete, the proponent shall be notified in writing within thirty (30) days of its 
receipt. 
 
(3) Where the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study report is found to be
=== PAGE 13 ===
13 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
inadequate, the Ministry shall return it to the proponent for revision, taking into consideration 
the comments and objections of the Ministry. 
 
16. Invitation of comments from the General Public 
 
(1) The project proponent shall invite the public to make their views on the draft 
environmental and social impact study in writing within twenty (20) working days of 
receiving notification of approval from the Ministry. 
 
(2) The project proponent’s invitation to the public shall be undertaken through a platform 
with a national circulation and coverage especially a newspaper and radio station in 
accordance with timeline stipulated by the Ministry. 
 
(3) The project proponent’s invitation to the public shall indicate: the type of the project and 
location; potential adverse impacts, potential positive impacts of the project; the proposed 
mitigation strategies put in place to respond to the adverse impacts; and the review period and 
centres. The notice under this sub-Regulation shall be in the format prescribed in Form 6 set 
out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
17. Review of comments from the general public 
 
(1) The Ministry shall within twenty (20) working days of receiving the comments of the 
public send copies of the draft environmental social impact study and the comments made 
thereon by the general public to each member of the Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment taskforce for them to review and comment on. 
 
(2) The Environmental Impact Assessment Taskforce shall convene within twenty (20) 
working days of receiving the draft statement and all the comments received under the 
regulations and make a decision. 
 
18. Basis of decision making of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study 
license 
 
(1) In making a decision regarding an environmental and social impact study under these 
regulations, the Ministry shall take into account- 
 
a) the validity of the predictions made in the environmental and social impact study 
b) views from public made under these regulations; 
c) analysis of the socio-economic and cultural impacts of the project; 
d) the adequacy of the proposed mitigating strategies and the environment and social 
management plan; and 
e) other aspects deemed crucial and relevant to the project by the Ministry 
(2) The Ministry shall make a decision under this regulation within thirty (30) working days 
from the date on which the study was submitted.
=== PAGE 14 ===
14 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
19. Decision of the Ministry 
 
(1) The Ministry in taking into account the whole review process may- 
 
a) approve the project; grant provisional approval based on evidence provided; 
b) require that the project be redesigned including that different technology or an 
alternative site be chosen; 
c) refer back the project or part thereof to the developer where there is insufficient 
information for further study or submission of additional information, including an 
environment and social management and monitoring plan as may be required to 
enable the Ministry make a decision; and 
d) reject the project. 
 
(2) A decision of the Ministry under this regulation and reasons shall be communicated to the 
project proponent within fourteen (14) working days of the decision. 
 
20. Conditions of approval of a project 
 
In making decision to approve the project, the Ministry in consultation with the Federal level 
taskforce shall- 
 
(a) give approval subject to such conditions it deems necessary; 
(b) state the period for which the approval shall remain valid; 
(c) issue a licence of approval of the project in the form contained in the Form 2 in the 
Second Schedule of these regulations. 
 
22. Cancellation of approval 
 
(1) At any time after the issuance of a certificate of approval of the project, the Ministry may 
revoke the approval where- 
 
a) there is non- compliance with the conditions set out in the licence of environmental and 
social approval; 
b) where there is a substantial modification of the project implementation or operation 
which may lead to adverse environmental impacts; 
c) where there is a substantive undesirable effect not contemplated in the approval. 
 
(2) A revocation under sub-regulation 21(1) shall lead to the automatic- 
 
(a) waive the claim and continue with assessment and review process under these Regulation; 
or 
 
(b) withdrawal, the information submitted for the assessment and cancel the review process 
under these Regulations.
=== PAGE 15 ===
15 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
PART IV: STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT 
 
23. Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) Study 
(1) The Ministry shall determine the need for a Strategic Environmental and social 
Assessment to take into consideration environmental and social concerns in the Policy, Plans 
or Programmes and evaluate their interlinkages with economic and social consideration. 
(2) The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment objectives shall be to: 
a) To provide informed and integrated decision-making by identifying proposed action’s 
environmental effects, considering best practical alternatives and identifying 
appropriate mitigation measures including the do-nothing option to safeguard the 
environment from any harm. 
b) To contribute to environmentally sustainable development by: anticipating and 
preventing environmental impacts at source, early warning of on risks and putting in 
place environmental safeguards based on sustainable development principles 
c) to enhance the consistency of a Policy, Programme and Plan across different sectors, 
and when relevant, make explicit the trade-offs or alignments made between different 
sectoral objectives 
d) contributes to enactment of policies and programmes meeting obligations under 
international environmental agreements 
e) instituting environmental accountability in sector-specific agencies thus mitigating 
adverse environmental impacts from different sectors. 
f) ensure consideration for critical environmental principles including public 
participation, intergenerational and intra-generational equity, precautionary principles 
and the polluter pays principle in the development of policies, regulations and plans 
for sustainable development. 
g) To contribute to greater transparency and openness in decision-making through multi- 
stakeholder engagement throughout the process. 
(3) The steps involved in Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) are: 
a) Screening (determining need for SESA or not) 
b) Scoping (determining the range of environmental and social issues to be covered by 
the SESA 
c) The preparation of draft Strategic Environmental and Social Report 
d) The carrying out of consultations and getting public comment on the draft SESA 
report. 
e) The integration of environmental considerations into the Plan or Programme 
f) The publication of information on the decision (SESA Statement) 
 
24. Submission of the Policy, Plan or Programme brief by the Proponent 
(1) SESA should be undertaken by proponent of a policy, plan or programme providing 
relevant information for formulation of proposals and decision making by the Ministry. 
(2) The Ministry shall within seven (7) days communicate the screening results to the 
proponent 
(3) outcomes of screening:
=== PAGE 16 ===
16 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(a) full or comprehensive SESA required 
(b) further study required to determine need for SESA 
(c) SESA not required 
 
25. Submission and approval of the scoping report 
(1) The Ministry shall advice the proponent of the policy, plan or programme to undertake a 
scoping study with aim of defining thematic and geographic scope upon concluding that a 
Strategic Environmental Assessment under Regulation 23 is needed. 
(2) The proponent of the Policy, Plan or Programme shall select a lead environmental and 
social assessment expert(s) or firm of experts licensed by the Ministry to do the scoping 
study. 
(3) The proponent of the Policy, Plan or Programme shall prepare the scoping report and 
submit at least  three (3) copies to the Ministry for approval, 
(4)  The Ministry shall review the submitted scoping report and avail a Record of Decision to 
either approve it or request for additional information within a period of twenty-one (21) 
working days from the date of submission of the scoping report. 
 
26. Development of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report 
(1) The proponent of the Policy, Plan or Programme shall through environmental and social 
assessment experts conduct the study and prepare a draft Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessment report upon approval of the scoping report by the Ministry. The content of the 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment shall provide with the following contents: 
(1) Description of the plan, identify relationship with other relevant plans and programme 
(2) Description of the current environmental and social conditions, issues and how they 
would evolve without the plan 
(3) Objectives, purpose and rationale 
(4) Alternative options or activities for Policy, Plan or Programme; and implementation 
plan and timescale 
(5) integration of climate change vulnerability assessment, priority adaptation and 
mitigation actions 
(6) Identification of likely significant effects of the proposed plans or programme 
(7) Mitigation of likely significant effects from the proposed plans or programme 
(8) Monitoring of likely significant effects from the proposed plans or programme 
(9) Non-technical summary briefly describing the study and its outcomes. 
 
27. Consultation and Public Participation 
(1) The proponents of the policy, plan or programme shall consult relevant State 
government(s), lead agencies, key stakeholders and members of the public during the 
entire SESA process. 
(2) Consultation and public participation should occur iteratively throughout SESA process, 
most importantly during screening, scoping and decision-making. 
(3) ensure meeting notice is sent out at least fourteen (14) working days prior to the meeting 
and that the venue, date and time of the meeting is convenient for all.
=== PAGE 17 ===
17 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(4) Hold at least three (3) public meetings with the relevant stakeholders and communities for 
the purpose of understanding proponent’s Policy, Plan or Programme and its impact, and 
to receive their comments in both oral and written form. 
 
28. Submission of draft Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report 
(1) The Policy, Plan or Programme proponent shall submit to the Ministry at least five (5) 
printed copies or as prescribed by the Ministry from time to time and one (1) electronic 
copy of the draft Strategic Environmental Assessment report accompanied by a 
submission Form 1 set out in Third Schedule of these Regulations 
(2) The Ministry shall within fourteen (14) working days from the date of submission of the 
draft report conduct an internal review process to determine adequacy of the draft report. 
 
 
29. Invitation of comments on draft Strategic Environment and social Assessment 
report 
 
(1) The Ministry shall within seven (7) days of determination of adequacy under Regulation 
38, dispatch copies of the draft report to the relevant State Environment Ministryand State 
level ESIA committees, Federal level ESIA committee where applicable, lead agencies and 
other stakeholders for their comments. 
(2) Upon receiving the draft report, the State Environment Ministry and State level ESIA 
committees, Federal level ESIA taskforce, lead agencies and other stakeholders shall review 
it and submit their comments within forty-five (45) days or such other period as the Ministry 
may specify 
(3) The Ministry shall within seven (7) days of determination of adequacy, at the expense of 
the Policy, Plan or Programme proponent– 
a) publish a notice on the draft Strategic Environmental Assessment report for the 
Policy, Plan or Programme each one week apart in two newspapers of nationwide 
circulation and in the Gazette and radio broadcasting nationwide at least once a week 
for two consecutive weeks inviting the public and other relevant stakeholders to 
submit written and oral comments respectively 
b) The Ministry shall publish a copy of the draft Strategic Environmental Assessment 
report in the Ministry website throughout the public participation process 
c) The public may submit their comments to the Ministry within forty-five (45) days 
from the date of the first publication of the notice inviting comments from the public 
 
30. Incorporation of comments in the draft Strategic Environmental and social 
Assessment report 
(1) Upon receipt and reviewing the comments from relevant State Environment Ministry, 
State level ESIA committees and Federal level ESIA taskforce, lead agencies, members 
of the public and other stakeholders, The Ministry shall upon analysing send the
=== PAGE 18 ===
18 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
comments to the proponent of the policy, plan or programme for the purpose of 
incorporating them in the draft SEA report. 
(2) Comments from relevant State Environment Ministry, State level ESIA committees and 
Federal level ESIA taskforce, lead agencies, members of the public and other 
stakeholders shall be incorporated by the policy, plan or programme proponent within 
sixty (60) days from the date of request by the Ministry and submit three (3) printed 
copies and one (1) electronic copy of the revised draft Strategic Environmental 
Assessment report to the Ministry. 
(3) Upon receipt and verification of the revised draft Strategic Environmental Assessment 
report, The Ministry in consultation with the proponent of the policy, plan or programme 
organize a validation workshop(s) within thirty (30) days involving all stakeholders for 
the purpose of validating the content and adequacy of the revised draft Strategic 
Environmental and social Assessment report. 
 
31. Submission of the final Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment Report 
(1) Upon incorporation of all the comments, the proponent of the policy, Plan, or Programme 
shall endorse the final Strategic Environmental and social Assessment report and submit five 
(5) printed copies of the final Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report or as 
deemed by the Ministry from time to time and one (1) electronic copy together with a duly 
completed Form 1 set out in the Second Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
32. Record of Decision on Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report 
(1) Upon review of the final Strategic Environmental and social Assessment report, the 
Ministry shall give a Record of Decision for a Plan or Programme within thirty (30) days 
from the date of submission of the final Strategic Environmental and social Assessment 
report under this Regulations 
(2) In the case the record of decision for a Plan or Programme is an approval, the Ministry 
shall issue to the proponent of the Plan or Programme an approval with conditions 
(3) In the case the submitted final Strategic Environmental and social Assessment report is 
declared unsatisfactory, the Ministry shall issue a written notice of deficiency requiring 
the proponents of the plan and programme to comply with the Ministry recommendations. 
(4) For Policy, the Ministry shall prepare a briefing note within thirty (30) days and submit to 
the Office of the Prime Minister, Federal Government of Somalia 
(5) The contents of briefing note shall include the following amongst others: 
a) Policy title and proponent; 
b) brief introduction of the Policy; 
c) Policy objectives and justification; 
d) SESA process brief; 
e) key ecological, social, economic and cultural issues and impacts; 
f) favourable alternative(s); 
g) ranking of other alternatives; 
h) trade-offs, resettlement and compensation 
i) conclusion and recommendations of the policy
=== PAGE 19 ===
19 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(6) The Office of the Prime Minister responsible for the Policy shall table it for Cabinet 
approval. 
 
33. Monitoring and evaluation of Policy, Plan or Programme 
(1) Monitoring and Evaluation(M&E) improves the links between policy interventions and 
their outcomes & impact, enhances accountability and policies’ efficiency and 
effectiveness in addressing environmental, social, economic and cultural issues. 
(2) The proponent of the Policy, Plan or Programme shall be responsible for all M&E issues 
and submit M&E reports to the Ministry every twelve months (12) or as deemed 
necessary by the Ministry from time to time. The Ministry shall formally evaluate the 
results of the M&E within thirty-six months (36) or as may be deemed necessary by the 
Ministry from time to time depending on the context of the Policy, Plan or Programme. 
(3) The Ministry shall undertake oversight over the monitoring and evaluation of the Policy 
with technical support from ESIA Federal Level-Taskforce and Federal Member States- 
Ministry of Environment and State Level ESIA-committee where necessary. 
 
 
PART V:   ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL AUDIT 
34. Environmental and Social Auditors 
A person shall not carry out an environmental and social audit unless that person has been 
duly certified and registered in accordance with the Section 46 of the Environment 
Management (Environment and Social Impact Assessment) Regulations, 2024. 
35. Fundamental principles of environmental and social audit 
1. Undertaking Environmental and Social Audit shall be based on the principles that: 
a) It is conducted by an individual or firm certified and registered under the Environmental 
and Social (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, 2024 and be performed in a 
professional manner. 
b) Project proponent is obligated to maintain and preserve a harmonious balance between the 
ability of the environment to support activities and sustainable development 
36. Environmental and Social Audits 
1. All projects or entities that are likely to have adverse environmental and social impacts 
shall be subject to environmental and social audits study based on the Ministry guidelines. 
2. The project proponent shall undertake an initial environmental and social audit within a 
timeline of not less than one (1) year and not more than three (3) years after completion or 
start of the project. 
3. The proponent shall undertake the audit based on risk assessment. Low risk projects under 
Project type B of the First Schedule to be performed every three (3) years, high risk projects 
under the Projects Type A of the first Schedule to be performed every twelve (12) months. If
=== PAGE 20 ===
20 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
the project life is shorter than the aforementioned timeline, the audit may be required sooner. 
The Ministry may require other audits subsequent to the initial audit if deemed necessary. 
4. The initial environmental and social audit shall be carried out by a qualified and authorized 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Audit expert approved by the 
Ministry. 
5. The prescribed environmental and Social audit shall be undertaken based on the approved 
terms of reference by the Ministry. 
37. Preparation of environmental and social audit report. 
(1) An environmental and social audit report shall be prepared under the general direction of 
an environmental and social auditor who shall head a team of auditors. 
(2) Any changes in the scope of work during the preparation of the environmental and audit 
report shall be agreed upon by the parties to the environmental and social audit. 
 
 
38. Undertaking Environmental and Social Impact Audit 
(1) Undertaking an environmental and social audit shall involve use of questionnaires, visits 
to the environmental sites and test analysis and in the manner specified in this Regulation. 
The content of Environmental and Social Audit Report should minimum comply with the 
criteria set out in the Fourth Schedule to these Regulations. 
(2). The environmental and social auditor shall: 
a) 
Take into consideration describing the project first 
b) 
Indicate project objective 
c) 
Scope and audit criteria 
d) 
Be in compliance with national and international environmental law and 
regulatory frameworks on health and safety and sustainable use of natural 
resources. 
e) 
Verify the project developer’s level of compliance with the requirements set in 
the environmental and social management plan. 
f) 
evaluate the developer’s awareness, knowledge and responsibility for the 
application of relevant legislations. 
g) 
review documentation of existing project related to all infrastructural facilities 
and design for the purpose of safeguarding the environment against any harm 
h) 
examine monitoring programs, parameters, and procedures in place for control 
and corrective actions in case of emergencies; 
i) 
examine records of incidents and accidents and the likelihood of future 
occurrence of the incidents and accidents; 
j) 
integrate climate change vulnerability assessment, priority mitigation and 
adaptation actions; 
k) 
inspect all buildings, premises and yards in which manufacturing, testing and 
transportation takes place within and without the project area, as well as areas
=== PAGE 21 ===
21 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
where goods are stored and disposed of and give a record of all significant 
environmental and social risks associated with such activities; 
l) 
examine and get views from project team, local communities, vulnerable 
groups in the project area and other potentially affected people on health and 
safety issues from the project. 
m) 
Assess health and environmental concerns of past and ongoing activities. 
(3) The environmental and social audit report shall have the following structure: 
(a) executive summary; 
(b) project’s current status information; 
(c) audit objectives and scope; 
(d) audit protocol, criteria and methodology used; 
(e) findings and observations; 
(f) description of key issues including the discovered project strengths and 
weaknesses; 
(g) recommended actions; 
(h) conclusions; 
(i) list of documents used or cited as references; and 
(j) appendices (photographs, future Plan of Action, consultancy and the list of 
stakeholders consulted. 
(4) Environmental and social audit report shall be signed by each of the individual persons 
who conducted the environmental and social audit. 
(5) upon completion of an environmental and social audit study report, the proponent shall 
submit at least five (5) printed copies or as the Ministry may authorize from time to time and 
an electronic copy of the report to the Ministry in the stated format. 
(6) upon receipt of the environmental and social audit report, the Ministry shall within seven 
(7) days dispatch a copy of the report to: 
(a) the relevant State Government; 
(b) each of the relevant lead agencies; 
(c) Federal task force and State level ESIA and audit Committee; 
(d) Where more than one State is involved, to the relevant State Government and local 
environmental management units for their written comments to be submitted to the 
Ministry within fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt of the audit report from the 
Ministry. 
(6). On receipt of comments or where no comments have been received by the end of the 
period of twenty-one (21) days from the date of receipt of the audit report, the Ministry will 
proceed to evaluate the audit report. 
(7). Once the Ministry is satisfied that the project operations complied with the 
Environmental and social Management Plan and there were no adverse environmental and 
social impacts, the Ministry shall annually issue a Certificate of Environmental and social
=== PAGE 22 ===
22 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Compliance in Form Five (5) set out in the Second Schedule of these Regulations within 
forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the audit report. 
39. Submission of environmental and social audit report 
An environmental and social audit report shall be submitted to the owner or operator of the 
facility within fourteen days after the completion of the audit. 
40. Control Environmental and Social Audit 
(1) Control environmental and social audit study shall be carried out by Ministry whenever it 
considers necessary to check the project compliance with the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan. This can also be necessitated after successful written or oral petition by a 
member of the public to undertake an audit. 
(2) The control environmental and social audit shall confirm that the project is adhering to the 
set Environmental and social Management Plan and verify its adequacy in mitigating adverse 
environmental impacts. 
(3) A control environmental and social audit shall be conducted by environmental and social 
inspectors 
41. Post Audit Order 
(1) The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Taskforce may issue an improvement 
order for the carrying out of corrective measures for mitigating the environmental 
degradations revealed during any audit study. 
42. Inspection 
(1) An environmental inspector empowered by the Act may, at reasonable times, enter on 
any land, premises or facility of a project for the purposes of inspection, to examine records 
and to make enquiries on the project.An environmental inspector may conduct or cause to be 
conducted an enforcement environmental and social audit on any facility where there is 
reasonable cause to believe that— 
(a) the activities being carried out at the facility violate or are likely to violate the Act 
or Regulations made under the Act; 
(b) the activities being conducted at the facility are likely to cause immediate danger 
and harm to human health, or have undesirable and irreversible damage to the 
environment; 
(c) a violation of any other law relating to the environment, other than one referred to 
in paragraph (a), is taking place. 
(2) An environmental inspector shall— 
a) in the case of sub regulation (41) (a) or (b), serve the operator or owner of the facility 
with 
notice in writing, at least forty-eight hours before conducting the 
environmental and social audit; 
b) in the case of sub regulation (41)(c), serve the operator or owner of the facility with a 
notice in writing, requiring the operator or owner of the facility to carry out an 
environmental and social audit within a period determined by the inspector.
=== PAGE 23 ===
23 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(3) A person who refuses to answer questions, refuses to avail documents or refuses to give 
other information legitimately sought by the environmental inspector commits an offence as 
prescribed in the Act. 
 
43. Environmental and Social Monitoring by the Federal Level Taskforce 
 
(1) The Federal level taskforce shall in consultation with the Ministry, State governments and 
Federal Member States Level-Environmental Committees or other relevant bodies: 
a) monitor environmental and social phenomena with a view to making an assessment of 
possible changes in the natural environment and their likely impacts; 
b) monitor the operations of any industry, project or activity with a view to determining 
its immediate and long-term effect on the environment; 
c) except where a baseline survey has been carried out, cause the proponent to carry out 
a baseline survey to identify basic environmental and social parameters in the project 
area before implementation; 
d) determine the parameters and measurable indicators to be used in monitoring of 
projects; and 
e) conduct measurement of environmental changes that have occurred during project 
implementation. 
(2) The Federal level taskforce shall, in consultation with the Ministry, State governments 
and Federal Member States Level-Environmental Committees or other relevant bodies- 
monitor ongoing projects on a continuous basis in line with the guidelines. 
(3) The Federal level taskforce shall, upon detection of non-compliance with the conditions 
of approval of an environmental and social impact study certificate immediately, institute 
remedial action. 
 
44.Monitoring Report 
 
(1) After undertaking monitoring under regulation 42, the technical committee shall submit a 
monitoring report to the Ministry. The report shall include the following: 
(a) the name and physical address of project proponent; 
(b) the proposed project name; 
(c) date of implementation of the proposed project; 
(d) the date of the last monitoring report, including the report findings, action taken 
and its result; 
(e) details of the environmental parameters to be monitored as stipulated in the 
Environmental Management Plan; 
(f) results of the actual monitoring exercise; 
(g) new actions to be implemented including the criteria for the next evaluation; and 
(h) a non-technical summary of findings, conclusions and recommendations. 
 
(2) An environmental inspector may enter upon any land or premises for the purposes of 
monitoring the effects of any activities carried out on that land or premises upon the 
environment.
=== PAGE 24 ===
24 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
PART VI – GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
45. Transboundary ESIA issues 
(1) Where a project is anticipated to have a transboundary impact, the proponent shall, in 
consultation with the Ministry ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are put in 
place to avoid any adverse impacts considering any existing treaties and agreements 
between Somalia and the other States. 
 
(2) Where an activity is likely to have an impact outside Somalia’s borders, the scoping 
should reflect this by identifying and consulting interested and affected parties in the 
neighbouring countries. The assistance of Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
(MOECC)may be sought to make contact with counterparts in the neighbouring 
countries; 
 
(3) While public consultations in the manner prescribed in the Environmental Management 
Act may not be feasible in the affected countries, it may be possible to obtain their input 
via the counterparts of MOECC in those countries. In view of this an open reporting 
system through the MOECC may be helpful; 
 
(4) Ensure that concerns raised by the affected country are adequately addressed in the 
(5) consequent ToR; and; 
 
(6) Seek and obtain all relevant information from the affected countries. The MOECC may 
(7) be helpful in this exercise. 
 
46. Access to Information and Issues of Confidentiality 
(1) Information or documents submitted to the Ministry by any person in connection with 
Part II, Part III, Part IV and Part V of these Regulations together with the Ministry’s 
decisions and the reasons thereof shall be made available to the public in MOECC 
website and both local print and electronic media in accordance with the relevant 
legislation and on such other terms and conditions as the Ministry may prescribe. 
(2) A person submitting information to the Ministry may apply to the Ministry and indicate 
specific issues of confidentiality in the report to be excluded from the information or parts 
thereof from being made available to the public on the basis of commercial 
confidentiality or in the interest of national security. 
(3) Provided that this information shall remain available to the Ministry, and the Ministry 
shall take all measures to maintain confidentiality of the information and shall not copy, 
circulate, publish or disclose such information. 
 
 
47. Registration of Environmental and social impact Assessment (ESIA) experts.
=== PAGE 25 ===
25 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(1) A person who applies to be registered as a practitioner (Lead Expert, Associate Expert or 
Firm of Experts) in accordance with these Regulations shall comply with the qualification 
requirements and code of conduct as set out in Fourth Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
(2) An application for registration as a practitioner shall be in Form 3 set out in Second 
Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
(3) An application under this regulation shall be accompanied by a registration fee as 
specified in Fourth Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
48. Environmental and Social Assessment Expert Licence. 
 
(1) Environmental and social assessment expert Licence referred to shall be in accordance 
with Form 1 set out in Schedule 2 to these Regulations and shall be issued subject to payment 
of a fee specified by the Ministry from time to time. 
49. Code of Conduct for ESIA Experts 
 
(1) An Environmental Assessment Experts shall act professionally, accurately, fairly and in 
an unbiased manner in undertaking his work. 
(2) Environmental and Social Assessment Experts certified and licenced in accordance with 
the provision of relevant Regulations, may establish professional association to support 
professional development including as appropriate implementation of the ESIA Code of 
Practice in the Fourth Schedule of these Regulations. 
 
50. Effect of approval or rejection of project. 
 
(1) No civil or criminal liability, in respect of an approval of a project or consequence 
resulting from an approved project, shall be incurred by the Ministry or any person acting on 
his behalf, by reason of the approval, rejection or denial or any conditions attached to the 
approval. 
(2) The fact that an approval is made in respect of an Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA) shall afford no defence to any civil action or to a criminal prosecution 
under any enactment concerning the project or the manner it is operated or managed. 
 
51. Offences. 
(1) Notwithstanding any licence, permit or approval granted under any enactment, any person 
who commences, proceeds with, carries out, execute or the conduct of any project without 
approval from the Ministry under these regulations, commits an offence and on conviction is 
liable to a penalty prescribed under the section. 
(2) Any person who - 
(a) fails to prepare and submit a project brief/ESIA to the Federal Member State (FMS) 
Environment Ministry or Ministry contrary to these Regulations
=== PAGE 26 ===
26 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(b) fails to prepare and submit an Environmental and Social Impact Study Report 
contrary to these Regulations 
(c) is in breach of any condition of licence of Project Brief/ environmental and social 
impact assessment 
 
 
52. Appeals 
 
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by- 
 
(a) 
a refusal to grant a licence or a refusal to transfer a licence 
under these Regulations; 
(b) 
the imposition of any condition, limitation or restriction on a 
licence; 
(c) 
the revocation, suspension or variation of a licence issued under 
these Regulations; 
(d) 
the imposition of any environmental restoration order or 
environmental improvement order on the project by the 
Ministry; or 
(e) 
the approval or reinstatement by the Ministry of an 
environmental impact assessment licence; 
(f) 
A refusal to grant an approval for a Plan or Programme or the 
imposition of any condition, limitation or restriction on an 
approval 
 
may within sixty (60) days after the date of the decision against which he or she is 
dissatisfied, appeal to the Federal level ESIA and Audit task force 
 
(2) A person aggrieved by a decision may within thirty (30) days of such a decision or order, 
appeal against such decision and present their case to the Federal level ESIA and Audit 
task force 
(3) The fact that approval is given in respect of an environmental impact assessment shall not 
be a defence to any civil action or to a criminal prosecution under any enactment. 
 
53. Registers 
(1) The Ministry shall maintain the following registers - 
a) a register of all environmental and social impact assessment licence issued under 
these Regulations; 
b) a register of environmental and social impact statements, environmental audits and 
monitoring reports; 
c) a register of approvals of applications seeking exclusion of proprietary information 
from public access.
=== PAGE 27 ===
27 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
d) a register of all individual ESIA experts or firms of experts duly authorized to conduct 
or prepare environmental audits and a register of environmental and social audit 
reports. 
e) documentation of all accredited training institutions offering certificates to undertake 
ESIA 
f) The registers shall be publicly available registers maintained by the Ministry for 
examination by anyone under the terms set by the Ministry. 
 
 
54. Roles of the Ministry and FMS Ministries of Environment in enforcing the 
regulations 
 
 
a) 
The Ministry shall lead the Environmental and Social Assessments for policies, 
programs and strategies at the Federal Government of Somalia level 
b) 
The Ministry to lead the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments of all 
category A (high risk) level projects and trans-boundary (between Somalia and neighbouring 
countries) issues. Geographically appropriate FMS to also be involved in the process. 
c) 
FMS Ministries of Environment to receive project briefs for category B (medium and 
small risk) projects within the State. 
 
 
55. Transfer or delegation of functions 
(1) The Ministry may transfer or delegate functions to any local government body or sector 
Ministry, the performance of any of the functions or duties of the Ministry under these 
regulations.
=== PAGE 28 ===
28 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
FIRST SCHEDULE: APPLICABLE PROJECTS 
 
Project Type A – High Risk Projects 
Projects Requiring Full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study 
GENERAL 
 
 Major change in land use 
 Any national or state development plan 
 Conversation of greenbelts, agricultural lands and Buffer Zones of over 20 ha in urban 
area 
 Major structures within 150 metres of the high-water mark 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
 Large scale cultivation (≥ 100 Ha); 
 Water resources development projects; (i) Dams; command area ≥300 Ha;(ii) Water 
supply; command area ≥500 Ha; (iii)Flood control; command area ≥500 Ha; 
 Irrigation, drainage; command area ≥500 Ha; 
 Large scale mono-culture (cash and food crops) ≥100 Ha; 
 Floriculture; ≥5 Ha; and 
 In case of any project necessitating the resettlement of communities, please attach the 
Resettlement Plan. 
LIVESTOCK AND RANGE MANAGEMENT 
 
 Large Scale Livestock movement; ≥5000 cattle; and 
 Intensive livestock rearing units; ≥1,000 herd. 
FORESTRY 
 
 Timber logging; ≥5Ha; 
 Processing/ treatment of timber with chemicals; 
 Construction of road inside the forest reserve (All projects (irrespective of road size in 
kilometre); 
 Conversion of forest land for other uses. 
 Introduction of alien tree species and development of forest plantation; and elective 
removal of single tree species. 
 
FISHERIES 
 
 Large scale fish farming including prawn farming; 
 Industrial fish processing and storage ≥50 tonnes per day; and
=== PAGE 29 ===
29 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
WILDLIFE PROJECTS 
 
 Reintroduction or translocation of new species; 
 Wildlife ranching and farming; and 
 Creation of new sanctuaries or zoos or orphanages. 
TOURISM AND RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 Construction of resort facilities or hotels along the shorelines of lakes, river, islands and 
Ocean 
 Hill top resort or hotel development; and 
 Development of tourism or recreational facilities in protected and adjacent areas (national 
parks, marine parks, forestry reserves etc.) on islands and in surrounding waters. 
ENERGY 
 
 Transmission of Electricity; 
 Production of Natural Gas; 
 Thermal Power development; capacity ≥50 MW; 
 Hydro-electric power development; capacity ≥ 50 MW; 
 Nuclear power development; and 
 Development of other large scale renewable sources of energy 
 Off-shore Wind projects; 
PETROLEUM 
 
 Oil & gas field exploration and development; 
 Construction of offshore and onshore pipelines; 
 Construction of oil and gas separation, processing, handling and storage facilities; 
 Construction of oil refineries; and 
 Transportation of petroleum products through pipelines. 
 
TRANSPORT AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 Construction and/or expansion of trunk roads; 
 Construction and/or expansion of airports and airstrips and their ancillary facilities; 
 Construction and/or expansion of existing railway lines; and 
 Construction and/or expansion of ports and harbors. 
FOOD & BEVERAGE INDUSTRIES 
 Tobacco processing; and 
 Sugar factories. 
TEXTILE INDUSTRY 
 Cotton and Synthetic fibers; integrated textile mills (knitting, weaving, dying and 
fabric production). 
 
LEATHER INDUSTRY
=== PAGE 30 ===
30 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 Tanneries; All integrated plants. 
WOOD, PULP & PAPER INDUSTRY 
 
 Pulp and paper manufacturing (except waste paper). 
 
 
BUILDING & CIVIL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY 
 
 Industrial parks and housing estate; and 
 Developments on beach fronts. 
 
CHEMICALINDUSTRIES 
 
 Manufacture and storage of pesticide or other hazardous and / or toxic chemicals; 
 Manufacture of pharmaceutical products (Technical); 
 Production of paints vanishes; 
 Soap and detergent plants; and 
 Manufacture of fertilizers. 
 
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY 
 
 Extraction and purification of natural gas (if this is being done within the refinery along 
with primary and secondary products); and 
 Mining (Large and medium scale mines). 
 
NON-METALLIC INDUSTRY (PRODUCTS) 
 
 Cement Manufacturing 
METAL AND ENGINEERING INDUSTRY 
 
 Manufacture of non - ferrous products 
 (b)Manufacturing of iron and steel 
ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES 
 
 Battery manufacturing and recycling 
 
WASTE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 
 
 Toxic and Hazardous waste: 
. Construction of Incineration plants; 
. Construction of recovery plant; 
. Construction of waste water treatment plant; 
. Construction of secure landfills facility; and 
. Construction of storage (temporary) facility. 
 
 
 municipal solid waste:
=== PAGE 31 ===
31 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
. 
Construction of Municipal Solid Waste landfill facility 
. 
Municipal sewage: 
. 
Construction of sewage sewer system 
 
WATER SUPPLY 
 
 Canalization of water courses; 
 Diversion of normal flow of water; 
 Water transfers scheme; 
 Abstraction and/or utilization of ground and surface water for bulk supply; and 
 Water treatment plants. 
 Dam 
 
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLANNING, LAND RECLAMATION, HOUSING AND 
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS 
 
 land acquired for resettlement 
 establishment of refugee camps 
 land reclamation including land under water bodies; and 
 dredging of bars, groynes, promenades, dykes and estuaries. 
 
 
 
Projects Type B: Medium and Small Risk projects 
Project briefs required 
List of small-scale activities and enterprises that require registration but shall not require 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study. Further, the projects shall not require 
screening and scoping, rather, the Project Brief shall be examined and issued with an 
Environmental Impact Assessment Licence. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
 large Scale cultivation (<50 to 10 Ha); (b) water resources development projects: 
 water supply (command area (<200 to <50 Ha; (ii) flood control (command 
area(<200to<50Ha); (iii) irrigation, drainage (command area (<200 to <50 
 Ha); and(c) large scale mono-culture (cash and food crops) (<50 Ha). 
 floriculture (<2 Ha). 
LIVESTOCK AND RANGE MANAGEMENT 
 
 large Scale Livestock movement (< 1000 to <500 cattle); and 
 intensive livestock rearing units (< 500 to < 100 herd. 
 
 
FORESTRY 
 Selective removal of single tree species Ministry of Natural Resources (<100 tree species).
=== PAGE 32 ===
32 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
FISHERIES 
 Industrial fish processing and storage (<10 tonnes per day) 
 
TOURISM AND RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
 Camping activities 
 
FOOD & BEVERAGE INDUSTRIES 
 slaughter houses / abattoirs (All projects when number of animals slaughtered are <10 per 
day); 
 tobacco processing; and 
 canned fruits and sauces. 
 
 
TEXTILE INDUSTRY 
 Cotton & Synthetic fibers (All stand-alone knitting and weaving units). 
 
BUILDING & CIVIL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY 
 Schools, dispensaries, health-centres: 
 dispensaries and health-centres; and 
 all School projects (l <360 students). 
 Boreholes 
 Small dams 
METAL AND ENGINEERING INDUSTRY 
 
 Garages 
ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS INDUSTRIES 
 
 Installation and expansion of communication towers. 
WASTE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 
 
 municipal Solid Waste; 
 construction of composting plant; 
 municipal Sewage; and 
 night soil collection and treatment. 
 
PETROLEUM SECTOR PROJECTS 
 
 Small Service stations/fuel stations 
 Small LPG plants 
 Commercial dispensing facilities
=== PAGE 33 ===
33 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
SECOND SCHEDULE: ESIA FORMS 
FORM 1: APPLICATION 
Application Reference No.: .......................... 
 
THE ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT ACT 
 
APPLICATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL/STRATEGIC IMPACT 
ASSESSMENT LICENCE 
 
PART A: DETAILS OF PROPONENT 
 
Al: 
Name 
of 
proponent 
(Person 
or 
Firm): 
................................................. 
…………………….. 
 
A2: Postal Address: ................................................................................................................... 
 
A3: 
Name 
of 
contact 
person: 
....................................................................................................... 
 
A4: 
Telephone 
No.: 
..................................................................................................................... 
 
A5: 
E-mail 
Address: 
.................................................................................................................... 
 
PART B: DETAILS OF THE PROJECT/POLICY 
 
B1: 
Title 
of 
the 
proposed 
policy/project: 
...................................................................................... 
 
...................................................................................................................................................... 
 
B2: Objectives and the scope of the project/Strategic: ………………………………………. 
 
.................................................................................................................................................. 
 
B3: Brief description of the activities:…………………………………………………………. 
 
.....................................................................................................................................................
=== PAGE 34 ===
34 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
B4: Location of the proposed project (L.R. No., area, State and GPS Coordinates) 
 
...................................................................................................................................................... 
 
PART C: DECLARATION BY THE PROPONENT/REPRESENTATIVE 
 
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my 
knowledge 
 
Name: ................................................... Position: ....................................................................... 
 
Signature: 
..........................On 
behalf 
of: 
..................................................................................... Date: .............................. (Firm name 
and seal): 
 
PART D: DETAILS OF ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT EXPERT  
 
Name (individual /firm): ............................................................................ 
 
Certificate of registration No....................................................................... 
 
Environmental Assessment Practicing Licence No.: .............................................. 
 
Postal Address: ..................................................Tel: ............................... 
 
Email address: ....................................................... 
 
Position: ................................................Signature: ...................................Date: ..................... 
 
PART E: FOR OFFICAL USE 
 
Approved 
Not Approved: 
 
Comments: 
.................................................................................................................................... 
.................................................................................................................................................... 
Name of officer......................................................Designation.................................................. 
 
Sign......................................................................Date................................................................ 
 
Any person who fraudulently makes a false statement in a report or alters the project report 
commits an offence under these Regulations
=== PAGE 35 ===
35 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Important Notes: Please submit the following: (a) Three duly filled copies of this form;(b) 3 
copies of the Project Brief/ESIA report: (c) an electronic copy of the report 
 
To The Director-General, MOECC, Mogadishu, Somalia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 2: ESIA LICENSE 
 
Licence No.: ..................................... 
 
Application Reference No.: ..................... 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT LICENCE 
This is to certify that the Project Brief / Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Study 
Report...................................................................received from ..................................... (name 
of individual/firm) of.......................................................... (Address) submitted to the 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change in accordance with the Environmental 
Management    (Environmental    and    Social    Impact    Assessment)    Regulations    2024 
regarding..............................................................................................................      (Title      of 
project) whose objective is to carry…………………………………………………………… 
……….......................................................................................................................................... 
...................................................................................................................................................... 
.....(briefly describe purpose) located at……………………………………………………… 
(locality and State) has been reviewed and a licence is hereby issued for implementation of 
the project, subject to the attached conditions. 
Dated this..........day of........................... 20....... 
Signature ..................................................... (Seal)
=== PAGE 36 ===
36 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Director General;Ministry ofEnvironment and Climate Change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 3: ESIA EXPERT APPLICATION 
 
Application Reference No. ............... (For official use) 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT 2024 
APPLICATION FOR LICENCE TO PRACTICE AS AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND 
SOCIAL ASSESSMENT EXPERT 
PART A: DETAILS OF APPLICANT 
Al: 
Name 
of 
applicant 
(Individual 
or 
Firm): 
................................................................................ 
 
A2: Nationality: ........................................................................................................................... 
 
A3: If Firm: Local Foreign…………………………………………………………………… 
 
A4: Business /company Registration No. (where applicable): .................................................... 
 
A5: 
Postal 
Address: 
......................................................................................................................
=== PAGE 37 ===
37 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
A6: Telephone No.: ..................................................................................................................... 
 
A7: E-mail: .................................................................................................................................. 
 
A8: 
Applicant’s 
academic/professional 
qualifications: 
.................................................................. .................................................................................. 
 
A9: List of professionals, their academic/professional qualifications and their nationalities 
(where 
applicable): 
..................................................................................................................................................... 
 
A10: 
Field 
of 
Expertise 
................................................................................................................ 
 
A11: Experience in Environmental and Social Impact Assessment related activities (Table): 
...................................................................................................................................................... 
 
A12: Environmental Professional body membership no……………………………………… 
 
A 14: Application for licence to practice as (Tick where applicable): 
Lead Expert;  
 
Associate Expert; 
Firm; 
 
 
 
 
PART B: DECLARATION BY APPLICANT 
 
I hereby certify that the particulars given above are correct and true to the best of my 
knowledge 
and 
belief……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
Full name in block letters.......................................................Signature of applicant .................. 
 
Date.........................On behalf of .............................................................................. Position 
 
Firm Name and seal 
 
PART C: FOR OFFICIAL USE 
Approved 
Not approved 
Comments..................................................................................................................................... 
...................................................................................................................................................... 
 
Name.........................................................Designation................................................................ 
....
=== PAGE 38 ===
38 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
Sign............................................................ 
Date............................................................................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 4: CERTIFICATE OF PRACTICE 
 
Application Reference No: .......................................... 
 
Registration No: .......................................................... 
 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT 
CERTIFICATE OF PRACTICE OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
ASSESSMENT EXPERT 
 
This 
is 
to 
certify 
that 
M/S 
.............................................................................. 
of........................... 
(address) 
………………………………………………………………………………………...has 
fulfilled the requirement of certification to practice in in accordance with the provisions of 
the Environment Management Act 2024, and is authorized to practice in the capacity of 
a.................................................................................................................................................... 
 
The certificate is valid from ……………………………………….to………………………..
=== PAGE 39 ===
39 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated this..........day of......................... 20.... Signature............................................................ 
 
(Seal) Director-General, Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 5: COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE 
 
Application Reference No.: ………………………… 
 
Certificate No.: ……………………………… 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT, 2024 
CERTICATE OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMPLIANCE 
Application File Reference Number: ………………………………..……………………. 
 
Date: ……………………………………………….……….………………………………. 
 
Address: ………………………………………………..………………………..…………… 
 
Proponent (operator): ………………………………………………………………................. 
 
The Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MOECC) has reviewed the report and 
found it to have complied with the requirements of the Environmental Management 
(Strategic Assessment, Environment and Social Assessment) Regulations, 20.       and hereby 
issues   you   with   a   Certificate   of   Environmental   Compliance   for   a   period   of 
................................................................commencing from ......................... to ……………….
=== PAGE 40 ===
40 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
Dated 
this…………………………………. 
day 
of……………………. 
20……………………. 
 
 
Signature………………………………………………………………… 
(Seal) 
 
Director-General, 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
Conditions of the Certificate 
(1) Ensure compliance with the Environmental Management Plan as proposed in the 
Audit Report. 
(2) MOECC retains the power to revoke or cancel this Certificate in the event of non- 
compliance with any requirements under the Environmental Management act and its 
Regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 6: PUBLIC COMMENTS NOTICE 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ACT,2024 
 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC TO SUBMIT COMMENTS ON ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT 
 
Pursuant to Regulation 14 of the Environmental Management Act (Environment and Social 
Impact Assessment) Regulations, 2024, the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
(MOECC) has received an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report for the 
implementation 
of 
the 
proposed 
project……………………………………………………………………………… 
………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
(brief 
description 
of 
project……………………………….………………………………………at 
....................................................................... (locality) of District. The said project anticipates 
the 
following 
impacts………………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
… 
………………………………………………………………………………………….……… 
… 
……………………………………….………………… (describe anticipated   impacts   and
=== PAGE 41 ===
41 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
proposed mitigation measures). 
 
The full report of the proposed project may be inspected during working hours at: 
 
(a) The MOECC Headquarters; 
(c) MOECC State level offices, where applicable; 
(d) MOECC website: http://www.moecc.gov.so/ 
 
 
 
MOECC invites members of the public to submit written comments within 30 days of the 
date of publication of this notice to the: 
 
(a) Director-General, MOECC 
(b) FMS offices 
 
Dated this…………day of………………….20…………………… 
 
Signature…………………………………………………………… 
 
Director –General- 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
 
 
 
THIRD SCHEDULE: GENERAL ESIA GUIDELINES 
 
Made under Regulation 8 (1) 
PROJECT BRIEF TEMPLATE 
FEDERAL MEMBER STATE 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
 
 
All Correspondence to be addressed to the Minister 
 
REF: FMS/ .................. 
RECEIPT No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. DATE ............... 
 
 
 
1. Project Brief and Terms of references 
Instructions for completing the project brief:
=== PAGE 42 ===
42 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
All small and medium scale projects within Federal Member States shall require submission 
of a Project Brief to the Ministry of Environment at State Level. 
 
Please note that all sections of the form must be completed and additional information about 
the project should be attached to the form where the space provided is not sufficient 
(alterations of the form shall not be permitted). 
Any person who provides false information in the project brief fraudulently is liable to a 
penaltyunder section 50 of the Act.To ensure that the implementation of planned activity is 
not delayed, the project brief should be submitted at the time when a project concept is being 
considered or at the pre-feasibility stage of the project cycle. 
Please note that where it is determined by the competent authority that an environmental 
assessment study is required, the details and certificate of practice of the practitioners whom 
the developer intends to deploy, shall be submitted to the competent authority by the 
developer prior to undertaking the environmental impact assessment 
 
SECTION A: 
Applicant details 
Name of project: 
Estimated project cost: 
Project proponent: 
Contact person: 
Postal address: 
Physical address: 
Telephone no: 
E-mail address: 
Project location: (Location map should be attached) 
SECTION B: 
1. Project details: 
a. Provide a brief description of the project 
b. What is the physical scale or the size of the development? 
c. What is the anticipated lifespan of the project within the foreseeable or predicted 
future? 
 
2. Project processes: (Attach project flow diagram and photos where applicable.) 
a. What are the materials that the activity shall use, including both construction 
materials and inputs? 
b. What are the possible products and by-products including waste generation of the 
activity? 
 
3. Planning issues: 
a. Has land been allocated for the proposed project? 
(Attach supporting documents where applicable)
=== PAGE 43 ===
43 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
b. What is the current land use of the area or site for the proposed project? 
c. Will the proposed development require a change in land use?.......................... 
d. Are the following services available in the area where the development is to be 
located? 
 
 
Roads 
....................................................................... 
............ 
(specif 
y) 
Water 
.......................................................................... 
......... 
(specif 
y) 
Power 
.......................................................................... 
........ 
(specif 
y) 
Telecommunications 
..................................................................... 
(specif 
y) 
Sewerage system 
......................................... 
••• 
(specify) 
Waste management system .... 
0 . 0 
................................................. 
... .. 
0 
. 
0 
..................... 0. 0 
........... 
00• 
••0 
0•• 
(specify) 
 
Other .................................................................................................................... (specify) 
 
 
e. 
Will the development result in displacement of people or property? 
 
If yes, how many people or number of households will be affected? 
 
f. 
What is the (approximate) distance of the proposed site from the following 
land uses - 
i. 
residential ....................................................................................... 
ii. 
industrial .......................................................................................... 
iii 
commercial .......................................................................................... 
. 
iv. 
agricultural (arable/pastoral) ............................................................... 
v. 
civic & community (e.g mosque, school, park, etc) 
................................ 
 
g. Is the project located within or near any of the following areas? Specify the distance. 
 
Area 
Yes No 
Approximate
=== PAGE 44 ===
44 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
distance 
National park/game reserve/ 
Wildlife management area 
Wetland (river, stream, dam, pans or any 
other 
areas with open surface water (whether 
seasonal or perennial) 
Flood plains 
Important breeding areas for fauna 
Areas containing rare or endangered flora 
and fauna 
Important archaeological, historical, religious 
or cultural sites 
Areas protected under legislation 
Hilly areas 
 
SECTIONC: 
1. Outline the possible impacts of the project on the environment (biophysical and socio- 
economic) in terms of: 
a. Negative impacts 
 
 
 
 
b. Positive impacts 
 
 
 
 
c. What measures will be undertaken to address the negative impacts? 
 
 
 
 
d. Provide any additional information that may assist in the evaluation of the application.
=== PAGE 45 ===
45 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
SECTION D: 
I ............................................................. certify that the information provided is to the best of 
my knowledge true and correct. 
Signed:   
 
Date:   
 
 
 
 
 
Made under Regulation 11 (4) 
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR ESIA STUDY 
The Terms of Reference (ToRs) define all issues or the scope of work on which the ESIA 
study will focus. The information provided below should only be used as a guide since 
projects, their status in the project cycle, and proponent needs vary widely and, thus, ToR 
contents varies. 
 
The ToRs should also summarise the general scope of the environmental assessment and 
discuss its timing in relation to the processes of project preparation, design and 
implementation. The boundaries for the study area for the assessment should also be 
specified. 
 
A description of all the tasks to be performed in the ESIA study should be provided and 
should, at a minimum, include: 
 
 Policy and regulatory framework 
 Description of the environment- The description of the environmental baseline should 
include: 
 Physical environment: 
 Biological environment: 
 Socio-cultural environment (both present and projected where appropriate) 
 Public consultation: The ToRs should require that a consultation programme be 
clearly presented in the ESIA report 
 Analysis of alternatives to the proposed project 
 Prediction and assessment of the potential impacts for the proposed project: 
 Presentation of mitigation measures: The ToRs should indicate that the consulting 
team will recommend feasible and cost-effective measures to prevent or reduce 
significant negative impacts to acceptable levels and enhance positive impacts.   
 Development of an environmental and social management plan: The ToRs should 
indicate the structure to be used for the ESMP, which should normally incorporate 
any necessary monitoring and the identification of institutions responsible for
=== PAGE 46 ===
46 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
implementing the monitoring program. The ESMP should also contain a plan for 
decommissioning of the project. 
 Archaeological Impact Assessment (AlA) 
 Report: The environmental assessment report should be concise and limited to 
significant environmental issues. This section should describe the structure that will 
be used for the report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Made under Regulation 13 (2) 
 
CONTENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT(ESIA) 
STUDY 
The aim of the regulations is to provide basic and minimum information that ESIA Study 
report should contain. ESIA report contain information required by the Act.   The structure 
and content of the ESIA should therefore at the minimum contain the following: 
 
1. Details of project proponents and ESIA consulting team: This information could 
include name, postal addresses, telephone number(s), telefax, email indicated on the 
first page of the report. 
2. Executive summary: A concise summary of the report, briefly describing the project, 
location, proponent, the methodology used during the study, expected impacts, 
management measures as well as recommendations and conclusions. 
3. Introduction: The introduction should provide a discussion of the nature of the project 
proposed, its location, and if the project is part of a larger proposal. It should outline 
the background to the project and the reasons or necessity of it. 
4. Policy, legal and administrative framework: This section should identify and discuss 
in detail the relevance of the policies, legislation, regulations, plans, guidelines as well 
as planning and implementation approvals which have a bearing on the proposed 
project. 
5. Description of the project: Information on the description of the project should 
include but not be limited to the following- 
o Purpose of project; 
o The status of the project in the project cycle: pre-feasibility, feasibility, 
detailed engineering and design, implementation (construction), operational, 
decommissioning; 
o Location of proposed project on a map; 
o Preliminary design (if available), infrastructural requirements and size of the 
development;
=== PAGE 47 ===
47 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
o Anticipated duration of construction, operation, close down; 
o Proposed transport and access arrangements; 
o Overall operation of processes involved; 
o Type and quantity of resources used; and 
o Estimated type, quantity, composition, strength of residues or emissions; and 
processes for the containment, treatment and disposal of wastes. 
6. Description of baseline environment: The ESIA should provide an appraisal of 
dimensions of the study area and descriptions of relevant physical, biological and 
socio-economic conditions as this is important for future monitoring and auditing. 
7. Public consultation: This section should discuss the objectives, methods and results of 
public consultations undertaken during the scoping exercise. Where applicable, the 
methodology utilised for further consultation of during the ESIA, and outcomes of the 
consultations should also be discussed. A record of all stakeholders consulted as well 
as the minutes of the consultation meeting(s) should be annexed to the report. 
 
8. Identification and assessment of environmental impacts: This is a crucial part of the EIA 
process and forms the basis for any mitigation or enhancement action. This should 
include a description of the impacts for all the project phases that is, pre-construction, 
construction, operational and decommissioning phases. The description often captures 
the characteristics of the impacts which include – 
 
 Positive and negative environmental and social impacts 
 Direct and indirect: Direct impacts are created directly by a project action eg 
displacement of people caused by the project. Direct impacts are more easily 
identifiable and quantifiable than indirect impacts; 
 Long term and short term: during the construction phase of the project (short 
term), others persist to the operational phase (medium term) and others linger on 
long after the project has been decommissioned (long term); 
 Recurring and non-recurring: some impacts occur repeatedly in space and time, 
while others occur only once; 
 Regional and local: Some impacts cover large areas whilst others are restricted to 
a small area; 
 Cumulative and non-cumulative: Cumulative impacts result when impacts from 
one activity combine with those from another activity to produce a greater impact 
or a different impact. Non-cumulative impacts do not accumulate in space and in 
time; and; 
 Reversible and irreversible impacts. 
9. Considerations for transboundary impacts – where the environmental and social 
impacts of a project may be realised across international boundaries – The assessment 
should therefore include impacts beyond the boundary of Somalia 
10. Analysis of alternatives: Proposed investment design, site, technology and operational 
alternatives should be compared systematically in terms of their potential impacts, 
capital and recurrent costs, suitability under local conditions and institutional, training 
and monitoring requirements. To the extent possible, for each of the alternatives
=== PAGE 48 ===
48 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
(including the 'no action alternative'), the environmental and costs and benefits should 
be quantified and economic values attached where feasible. Alternatives can be 
grouped into demand alternatives, activities alternatives, location alternatives, process 
alternatives, input alternatives among others. 
11. Mitigation measures: Mitigation is the development of practical measures to reduce 
adverse impacts on the environment, or to enhance the beneficial aspects of an action. 
a) find ways of implementing projects with minimum environmental costs; 
b) minimise or eliminate negative impacts; enhance the benefits of a proposal; and 
c) protect the public and individual rights to compensation. 
d) Feasible and cost-effective measures which will reduce potential significant 
environmental and social impacts to acceptable levels should be proposed 
including capital and recurrent costs, and institutional and training requirements of 
those measures estimated. 
e) Elements of mitigation 
f) Rehabilitation-this refers to rectifying adverse impacts by repairing or enhancing 
the affected resources; 
g) Restoration-this is an extreme form of rehabilitation and typically requires an 
extensive engineering of a selected resource to achieve what might be considered 
original state. 
h) Compensation-this refers to the awarding of financial or material benefits to 
people affected by the project (especially those who have lost their homes and 
livelihoods). 
12. Archaeological Impact Assessment: A summary of the findings and recommendations 
of the Archaeological Impact Assessment should be discussed. Reference should be 
made to the detailed findings and recommendations which should form part of the 
appendices. 
13. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP): EMP allocates responsibilities, 
resources and attaches time frames. An important component of the EMP is the 
monitoring programme to assess progress in the implementation of mitigation 
measures and compliance of the project to regulations and standards. It is also 
necessary to have a decommissioning (Remediation and rehabilitation) programme 
for projects. The applicant should address impacts related to the decommissioning 
phase and a plan for addressing such impacts should be incorporated into the ESMP. 
The ESMP consist of the following components - 
 impact mitigation plan; 
 monitoring programme; 
 decommissioning programme. 
14. Conclusions and recommendations: Appropriate conclusions should be drawn from 
the report. It is important to have these conclusions summarised in a series of brief 
statements referring to relevant sections of the ESIA Report. This conclusion should 
focus on the methodology, significant impacts, the measures proposed to avoid or 
mitigate them and the impact management proposals for project implementation. This 
section should also contain recommendations to the project
=== PAGE 49 ===
49 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
15. References: The report should have a list of references used in the study. 
16. Appendices: Appendices contain information not directly useful in the text of a report 
but needed for reference or detailed review by technical expects. The list of 
appendices should include- 
a) terms of reference for the study; 
b) sources of data and information; 
c) all individuals and agencies consulted for specialist information or knowledge 
used in the report referred to in the text; written opinions received from outside 
specialists; 
d) field data collection programmes completed during the ESIA study; 
e) findings of the Archaeological Impact Assessment; 
f) detailed data reduced for use in the main body of the report; detailed technical 
analysis of particular impacts (for example, pollution dispersal, soil erosion, 
demands for social services); detailed location plan and technical maps, designs, 
drawings, photographs, flow diagrams, etc.; 
g) summary of the programme for consulting the public in project planning and 
assessment, plus a complete record of all parties (stakeholders) consulted and 
minutes of the meetings; 
h) names, curriculum vitae and roles of the team members who carried out the study; 
andany other relevant information 
NB: The detail of information is expected to vary with proposed management actions, 
complexity and likely impacts which come with different projects in different sectors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOURTH SCHEDULE: ESIA EXPERTS 
 
(Made under Regulations 47 (1) 
 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT AND 
AUDITS EXPERTS 
Local and foreign environmental assessment individuals and firms of experts wishing to 
undertake Strategic Environmental Assessment, Environmental and Social 
Impact 
Assessment and/or environmental audit activities in Somalia shall register as experts with the 
Ministry. 
Upon meeting the qualifications set out below for both local and non-local Lead Expert, 
Associate Expert and Firm of Experts, the application fees for registration and issuance of the 
ESIA license fees in Somalia shall be paid to the Ministry of Finance with the procedural 
approval of Ministry under these regulations. 
 
 
 
The following shall be the criteria for registration of experts:
=== PAGE 50 ===
50 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
A Lead Expert 
A Lead Expert must have attained the following qualifications: 
Minimum of Master’s Degree or equivalent in any relevant field as set ESIA or 
environmental audit from an accredited institution in accordance with requirements, with at 
least five (5) years practical experience in environmental assessment related activities 
including work experience, consultancy, training and research. 
Registration fees for locals as a Lead Expert: Forty dollars ($40) 
Registration fees for non-locals as a Lead Expert: Hundred dollars ($100) 
 
 
B. Associate Expert 
An Associate Expert must have attained the following qualifications: 
A Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent in any relevant field as set out in Section D or a diploma 
in any relevant field in addition to approved training in environmental and social assessment/ 
audit from an accredited institution. 
Registration fees for locals as an Associate Expert: Thirty dollars ($30) 
Registration fees for non-locals as an Associate Expert: Seventy dollars ($70) 
 
 
C. Firm of Experts 
A firm of experts must meet the following conditions: 
Must be registered in Somalia to offer environmental and social assessment expertise. 
Must submit to the Ministry a firm profile indicating capacity of its directors, partners and 
associates to undertake environmental assessment and audit studies. 
 A Lead Expert who must be registered by the Ministry and must have a current 
practicing licence. 
 Foreign firms must demonstrate the contribution of local expertise. 
Registration fees for firm of Experts-locals: Sixty dollars ($60) 
 
Registration fees for firm of Experts- non-locals: one hundred and eighty dollars ($180) 
 
 
 
D. Application for Renewal of Practicing Licence 
 
Upon registration, all Experts shall apply for practicing Licence which should be renewed 
annually. 
 
Requirements for renewal of Licence: 
 
-Payment receipts for the prescribed fees.
=== PAGE 51 ===
51 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
-A copy of licence of the previous year or a copy of the certificate of registration. 
 
Licence renewal Fees - SOMALIA 
 
Category 
Locals 
Non-locals 
Associate Expert 
$40 
$100 
Lead Expert 
$50 
$200 
Firm of Experts 
$240 
$720 
 
 
 
The Ministry shall acknowledge receipt of duly filled applications within fourteen (14) days. 
Thereafter, issue Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) licenses within 45-90 days as 
stipulated in the Environmental Management Act. 
 
 
Customer Obligation 
 
Proponents are advised to apply for an EIA license at least ninety (90) days before project 
commencement to allow adequate time for undertaking EIA review process. 
Proponents are required to pay the prescribed fees on time 
Proponents are required to provide all relevant support documents with no delay 
The EIA experts doing the reports are expected to perform their duties with utmost 
professionalism including providing accurate information on the proposed project. 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Relevant Field of Expertise 
Environmental Studies, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Engineering (Civil, Agricultural, 
Water, Process/Chemical), Geography, Earth Sciences, Biophysical Sciences, Natural 
Sciences, Environmental Socio-Cultural Studies, Environmental Law or any other field 
approved by the Authority on the recommendation of a Professional Body or the 
Environmental Expert Advisory 
 
VETTING. 
 
Upon application, the applicant may be invited in person for an interview and screening by 
the Registration Panel. 
 
CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Every Environmental and Social Assessment Expert shall each year attend at least one 
relevant seminar organized by the recognized Environmental Professional Association in
=== PAGE 52 ===
52 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
consultation with the Ministry for the purposes of improving the professional expertise of its 
members. 
 
 
 
 
(Made under Regulations 49 (2) 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT OF PRACTITIONERS REGISTERED UNDER THE ACT 
 
Environmental Assessment experts shall carry  out their professional activities, as far as 
possible, in accordance with emerging principles of sustainable development, the highest 
standards of environmental conservation and quality, and in compliance with the letter and 
intent of relevant environmental legislation.  
 
i. 
Environmental Assessment experts shall at all times place the integrity of the 
environment, including conservation and sustainable use of the biophysical 
environment and the social welfare, health and safety aspects of the socio-economic 
environment, above any commitment to sectional or private interests.  
ii. 
Environmental Assessment experts shall ensure the incorporation of environmental 
considerations from the earliest stages of project conception or policy development. 
iii. 
Environmental Assessment Experts shall not conduct professional activities in a 
manner involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or bias.  
iv. 
Environmental Assessment Experts will clearly differentiate between facts and 
opinions in their work 
v. 
Environmental Assessment Experts will, to the best of their ability, keep informed of 
advances in environmental assessment practice, and will integrate such knowledge 
into their professional activities. 
vi. 
Environmental Assessment Experts will inform a prospective client of any 
professional or personal interests which may impair the objectivity of their work. 
vii. 
Environmental Assessment Experts will not seek employment, grants or gain, or 
attempt to injure the reputation or opportunities for employment of another 
environmental assessment practitioner by false, biased or undocumented claims or 
accusations, by any other malicious action, or by offers of gifts or favours 
viii. 
Environmental Assessment Experts will, to the best of their ability, use the best 
available information. 
ix. 
Environmental Assessment Experts should take responsibility for the findings of the 
environmental assessment. (However, the Environmental Assessment Practitioners 
cannot be held responsible for decisions made by other parties, purportedly based on 
the findings of the environmental assessment). 
x. 
Environmental Assessment Experts must only undertake particular environmental and 
social assessment work in apposition of responsible charge where they have the 
relevant expertise and experience to undertake that work competently. 
xi. 
Environmental Assessment Experts shall not advertise their professional services in a
=== PAGE 53 ===
53 
ESIA Regulations 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
self-laudatory manner that may discredit the profession. 
xii. 
Environmental assessment practitioners shall not misrepresent or allow or permit 
misrepresentation of their own or their associates' academic or professional 
qualifications, or exaggerate their degree of responsibility for any work of a 
professional nature. When requested to submit tender proposals, Environmental 
Assessment Experts shall structure any offer in such a way as to enable them to 
discharge their responsibilities to the client in every respect. 
xiii. 
Environmental Assessment Experts shall not review for a particular client the work of 
 
No 
Name of 
Expert 
Registration 
No. 
Annual 
Practicing 
Licence No. 
Contact Address 
Telephone No. 
Email address 
Area 
of 
specialization 
Experience 
Practicing 
Status 
 
 
another Environmental Assessment Experts except with the prior knowledge of such 
person and affording such person reasonable opportunity to submit comments on the 
findings of the review. 
xiv. 
Environmental Assessment Experts shall comply with the objectives of the ESIA 
professional body 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 7 
 
REGISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT EXPERTS
=== PAGE 54 ===
54 
ESIA Regulations 2024
