=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
 
Economic viability of abattoirs in Arid and 
Semi-Arid Land (ASAL) counties of Kenya 
 
 
Prepared for the Voice for Change Partnership (V4CP) by: 
Leonard Kirui and Joseph Karugia 
 
 
November 2019 
 
ILRI, Nairobi 
 
VOICE FOR CHANGE PARTNERSHIP (V4CP)
=== PAGE 2 ===
Contents 
 
Abbreviations and acronyms ......................................................................................................................... 3 
Acknowledgments ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
Executive summary ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
1.0 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.1 
Background ................................................................................................................................... 6 
1.2 
The need for abattoirs .................................................................................................................. 6 
1.3 
Objectives of the study ................................................................................................................. 7 
1.4 
Scope ............................................................................................................................................. 7 
1.5 
Methodology ................................................................................................................................. 7 
1.6 
Organisation of the report ........................................................................................................... 7 
2.0 
Synopsis of the livestock meat value chain ....................................................................................... 7 
2.1 
Current production systems ........................................................................................................ 7 
2.2 
Livestock supply chain and trade routes ...................................................................................... 8 
2.3 
The off-take rates and the meat sub-sector in Kenya .................................................................. 9 
2.4 
Demand for meat, meat products and by-products in different market segments .................... 10 
2.5 
Description of the policy and regulatory issues faced by abattoirs ............................................ 10 
2.6 
Coordination platforms to facilitate the value chain activities ................................................... 11 
2.7 
An overview of existing abattoirs ............................................................................................... 11 
3.0 
Review of abattoir initiatives in the ASAL areas ............................................................................ 14 
3.1 
Projects undertaken by donors, the private and public sectors ................................................. 14 
3.2 
Benefits and opportunities offered by the abattoirs in ASAL areas ........................................... 14 
3.3 
Review of existing and proposed county abattoirs .................................................................... 14 
4.0 
Economic and market considerations for setting up abattoirs in ASAL areas ............................... 16 
4.1 
Main requirements and considerations in order to access key export markets ....................... 16 
4.2 
Options for sustainability of abattoirs in ASALs ......................................................................... 17 
5.0 
Conclusions and recommendations ................................................................................................ 18 
6.0 
References ....................................................................................................................................... 19 
7.0 
Annexes .......................................................................................................................................... 20 
7.1 
Case study of a Lomidat Abattoir in Turkana County ............................................................... 20
=== PAGE 3 ===
Abbreviations and acronyms 
AfDB  
African Development Bank 
 
ASALs   
Arid and Semi-Arid Lands 
CECs  
County Executive Committee Members 
DFZ 
 
Disease Free Zones 
EPZ 
 
Export Processing Zones 
FCDC   
Frontier Counties Development Council 
HACCP 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
 
KBHC   
Kenya Bureau of Halal Certification 
MoU   
Memorandum of Understanding 
NGO  
Non-Governmental Organization 
RDA 
 
Regional Development Authorities 
SFAL 
 
Sector Forum for Agriculture & Livestock 
WSTF  
Water Sector Trust Fund
=== PAGE 4 ===
Acknowledgments 
 
We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Dutch Government through SNV and the Voice for Change 
Partnership (V4CP) Programme. We also acknowledge technical support and other valuable inputs 
provided by the CGIAR Research Program (CRP) on Livestock and all donors and organizations which 
globally support CGIAR research work through their contributions to the CGIAR Trust Fund.
=== PAGE 5 ===
Executive summary 
Recently, several large-scale meat processing abattoirs are under construction in the Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (ASALs) of Kenya. This is in response to the emerging meat export opportunities to the Middle 
East and North African countries. These developments are in the right direction toward expanding Kenya’s 
foreign exchange earnings and improving the livelihoods of livestock producers and other actors engaged 
in livestock related activities in the country. However, one of the major challenges facing the existing meat 
market is the inadequate supply of quality live animals for meat processing. It has been observed that the 
live animal throughput is inadequate and, as a result, the existing meat processing facilities operate at less 
than their full capacity. Overcoming the constraint of supply shortage of quality live animals is key to the 
feasibility of the proposed abattoirs. This study is conducted with the main objective of assessing the 
performance and economic viability of abattoirs in the ASAL areas. Detailed literature review of available 
studies was undertaken to provide documented information to achieve the study’s objective. 
It was observed that pastoralists in the ASAL areas do not provide adequate livestock numbers for the 
meat market due to their limited market participation in the meat market. The implication of limited 
livestock numbers and limited market participation is that under the current production and marketing 
conditions pastoral livestock production systems do not provide regular and adequate supply of quality 
live animals to the market, which adversely affect the efficient utilization of meat processing capacity of 
the existing abattoirs. This analysis recommends that the establishment of new export abattoirs in different 
ASAL counties has to proceed with great caution and take into account the availability of live animals for 
processing.
=== PAGE 6 ===
1.0 Introduction  
1.1 Background 
Livestock production is the dominant economic activity in the ASAL counties. These counties are home 
to nearly 70% of the national livestock herd. However, the potential of the livestock sector to increase 
the incomes of producers, create employment, reduce poverty and food insecurity in ASALs remains 
largely unexploited. A comprehensive analysis of the investment opportunities that are most likely to 
contribute to the achievement of these development goals need to be identified in a systematic manner 
to avoid mistakes that could be made from an incomplete assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of 
proposed interventions. Several studies document the constraints facing the development of a robust 
livestock system in Kenyan ASALs. These constraints relate to low population density, limited success of 
interventions to increase primary productivity; degradation of natural resources, conflict in managing 
common resources, weak links to national economy and low priority for public investment.  
Kenya’s domestic market is rapidly growing, and the country is a net importer of beef. Returns to the 
livestock sector in ASALs, and indeed Kenya as a whole, are dependent on both domestic and international 
demand for livestock products. Yet the livestock marketing system in ASALs is poorly developed to serve 
the domestic and international markets. One option that has been considered for improving the livestock 
marketing system in ASALs is the establishment of abattoirs. Moving abattoirs and marketing infrastructure 
closer to producing areas would increase value addition and local employment. An essential condition for 
successful abattoir operations is a guaranteed supply of animals. It is therefore important to understand 
the livestock keeping trends and establish the maximum sustainable offtake in terms of cattle, meat, and 
other livestock products.  
1.2 The need for abattoirs 
Recently, several large-scale meat processing abattoirs have been established in the ASAL areas of Kenya 
in response to the emerging meat export opportunities to the Middle East and north African countries. 
There are also several meat export abattoirs under construction, and more are planned to be established 
in the near future in different regions of the country. These developments are in the right direction toward 
diversifying and increasing Kenya’s foreign exchange earnings and improving the livelihoods of livestock 
producers and other actors engaged in the livestock related activities. One of the major challenges facing 
the meat export abattoirs has been the competitiveness of these firms in the domestic and export markets 
due to underutilization of their meat processing capacities, (Asfaw and Jabbar, 2008). It has been observed 
that the live animal throughput is inadequate and, as a result, the existing meat processing facilities operate 
at less than 50% of their operational capacities, for example the Lomidat Abattoir in Turkana County. This 
is apparently due to inadequate supply of the required quality of live animals for meat processing by the 
export abattoirs. Export abattoirs are competing with the demand for live animals for domestic 
consumption, and for formal and informal (cross-border) trade. The key problem is that when the meat 
processing abattoirs are not operating at their optimum capacity, they are not minimizing their costs of 
operations and they are facing cost disadvantage, which makes them less competitive in the domestic and 
international meat markets, (Asfaw and Jabbar, 2008). Meat export abattoirs are also required to ensure 
a consistent and continuous supply of meat in order to meet the demand of the customers in the importing 
countries. Thus, there is an urgent need to devise alternative strategies to ensure adequate market supply
=== PAGE 7 ===
of quality live animals to meet export abattoirs processing needs in order to improve their efficiency and 
competitiveness. 
 
1.3 Objectives of the study 
The main objective of this study is to get a better understanding of performance and economic viability of 
abattoirs in the ASAL areas and draw key implications for meat value chain development in the country. 
 
1.4 Scope 
This was an analysis conducted in selected counties around the old North Eastern province. The counties 
represented were: - 
Isiolo, Turkana, West Pokot, Wajir and Mandera. 
 
1.5 Methodology 
Data to address the research objectives was collected from secondary sources. Detailed literature review 
was undertaken to provide documented information on different study topics. 
 
1.6 Organisation of the report 
The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Chapter 2 gives a synopsis of the livestock 
meat value chain; Chapter 3 reviews the current meat and meat products development initiatives in the 
ASAL areas while Chapter 4 looks at the current status of abattoirs in ASAL counties. The last sections 
of the study reviews the economic and market considerations for setting up abattoirs in ASAL areas and 
proposes some alternative options for sustainability of the abattoirs.   
 
2.0 Synopsis of the livestock meat value chain 
2.1 Current production systems  
The red meat, comprising beef, mutton, goat and camel meat, accounts for over 80% of all the meat 
consumed in the country in general. The white meat from poultry and pork accounts for about 19% of 
the meat consumed (EPZA, 2005). Approximately 80 to 90 % of the red meat consumed in Kenya comes 
from livestock raised by pastoralists under extensive production system within Kenya and neighboring 
countries mainly Tanzania, South Sudan, Ethiopia and Somalia (Farmer and Mbwika, 2012). Kenyan 
pastoralists account for 65-70 % of the Kenya red meat supply the remaining 20-25% comes from informal 
cross border trade with neighbouring countries. Private ranches contribute 2–3% of total meat production 
in Kenya, principally for the high value market.  
In Kenya, the average per capita consumption of red meat is about 15.5 kg with an annual production of 
about 600,000 metric tons (International Development, 2014). Despite the seemingly abundant meat and 
consumer markets, Kenya is a meat deficit country to the tune of 300,000 metric tons (I Dev report – 
Meat Sector in Kenya 2014). At the same time, the industry is very inefficient with huge losses occasioned 
by hot meat retail chain, low value addition, poor processing skills and worst of all, the food sanitary risks 
due to lack of bio security, cold chain and access to water and poor hygiene and inspection practices 
(Carron et al., 2017). The potential of the Kenyan market seemingly is increasing along with the population
=== PAGE 8 ===
of about 44.6 million with a culture of meat consumption (International Development, 2014). However, 
the growth in population and middle class has not effectively triggered the meat market system 
transformation to incentivize actors to take advantage of the demand. 
 
Figure 1: Kenya meat and livestock value chain map 
Source: Adapted from International Development (2014) 
 
2.2 Livestock supply chain and trade routes 
An essential condition for successful abattoir operations is a guaranteed supply of animals. In this section 
we review the livestock supply chain in the ASAL areas and the important trade routes. Kenya is a meat 
deficit country, especially when it comes to beef and lamb where the shortage in domestic supply is 
estimated at 18% for cattle and 19% for sheep. The domestic sheep shortfall is partially driven by a 
relatively strong export demand of sheep products. The goat supply exceeds domestic demand by 26%, 
although its consumption is particularly hard to trace due to its slaughter in informal settings and 
widespread use for ceremonial purposes (International Development, 2014). Cross-border livestock trade 
is the main source of meat supply (in form of live animals) to Kenya. Cattle is traded from Ethiopia through 
Wajir and Marsabit-Moyale markets and then directed to Garissa or Isiolo livestock markets which are 
considered as hubs for livestock trade from the northern territories to the terminal markets in Nairobi 
and Mombasa (Figure 5). In western Kenya, Kitale livestock market receives animals sourced in South 
Sudan (through Lokichogio market), Ethiopia (through Lodwar market), and Uganda, and serves regional 
livestock markets like Kisumu and Nakuru (Naitos Golden Inspiration, 2015). It is important to highlight
=== PAGE 9 ===
that livestock is also exported from Kenya to neighbouring countries: mainly camels and goats to Somalia, 
and shoats to Ethiopia. However, the volumes/number of animals exported are relatively low compared 
to the volumes sourced from these countries. 
Figure 2: Livestock trade corridors in Kenya 
 
Source: Adapted from International Development (2014) 
 
2.3 The off-take rates and the meat sub-sector in Kenya 
In smallholder mixed farming systems and also in pastoral systems, animals are kept for multiple functions, 
and sale or other forms of disposal are not regular phenomenon; rather sales are sporadic based on 
immediate cash needs. In this regard, one of the key questions to ask is: what proportion of the live animals 
from such herds will leave the livestock herders for off-farm slaughter or export or other kind of uses.  
According to data from the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, the number of animals slaughtered has 
been increasing over time. The number of cattle and calves slaughtered rose by 7.4 per cent from 2,590.0 
thousand heads in 2017 to 2,781.7 thousand in 2018. Similarly, the total number of goats and sheep 
delivered to slaughterhouses increased by 11.3 per cent to stand at 10,247.6 thousand heads in 2018.  
The cities of Nairobi and Mombasa are the key terminal markets accounting for 75% of country’s meat 
consumption with an average of 25.8 kg and 21.2 kg per person respectively. Nairobi city alone requires 
monthly supply of approximately 27,839 head of cattle, 71,555 sheep and goats, and 685 camels. Mombasa 
requires a monthly supply of about 8,178 head of cattle, 21,021 sheep and goats and 201 camels (I-Dev, 
2014)).
=== PAGE 10 ===
 
2.4 Demand for meat, meat products and by-products in different market 
segments 
Meat consumption is a measure of the demand for meat products and a means to assess growth in the 
sector. There is huge and rapidly growing demand for meat in Kenya fueled by population growth, 
urbanization and rise in people’s income (Bosire et al. 2017; Gamba et al. 2005). Nairobi and Mombasa 
are the leading demand centres for slaughter animals and therefore serve as the main terminal markets. 
As the demand for meat continues to rise, it is projected that Kenya will find it increasingly difficult to 
satisfy its local demand for beef and sheep meat through domestic offtake rendering the country 
increasingly reliant on importation. The bulk of meat consumed in Kenya is low quality and mostly comes 
from animals raised by pastoral communities. Quality preferences however vary among consumers. 
Willingness to pay premiums for quality, reliability and cleanliness is higher among higher income 
consumers (International Development, 2014). In line with higher willingness to pay for quality among high 
income groups, some abattoirs seek to produce superior quality meat and meat products which they sell 
to high end hotels, restaurants, supermarkets and in export markets at a premium. The abattoirs that 
target high end consumer segments include the Kenya Meat Commission (KMC), and other privately-
owned enterprises such as Quality Meat Packers, Farmer’s Choice, Alpha Fine Foods, and Ngare Narok 
Meat Industries. Ranches form the main source of animals slaughtered for this high-quality meat trade.  
2.5 Description of the policy and regulatory issues faced by abattoirs 
The following are the laws and policies that are used to regulate the establishment of abattoirs in Kenya: 
1) Public Health Act – An act of Parliament to make provisions for securing and maintaining health. 
2) Animal Diseases Act – An act of parliament to provide for matters relating to the diseases of 
animals. 
3) Meat Control Act – An act of Parliament to enable control to be exercised over meat and meat 
products intended for human consumption and over slaughterhouses and places where such meat 
is processed and to provide for import and export control over such meat and meat products. 
4) Food, Drugs and Chemical Substances Act – An act of parliament to make provision for the 
prevention of adulteration of food, drugs and chemical substances. 
5) Prevention of Cruelty to animals’ Act – An act to make better provision for the prevention of 
cruelty to animals; to control experiments on animals. 
6) National Bio Safety Authority Act – aims at facilitating responsible research and minimizing risks 
that may be posed by genetically modified organisms. 
7) Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary Para-Professionals act – An act of Parliament to make 
provision for training, registration and Licensing of Veterinary Surgeons and Veterinary para 
professionals to provide for matters relating to animal health services and Welfare. 
8) Fertilizers and Animal Foodstuffs Act – An act of parliament to regulate the importation, 
manufacture and sale of agricultural fertilizer and animal foodstuffs and substances of animal origin 
intended for the manufacture of such fertilizer and foodstuffs. 
9) Kenya Meat Commission Act – An act of parliament to establish a commission to purchase cattle 
and small stock, and to acquire, establish and operate abattoirs, meat works, cold storage 
concerns and refrigerating works for the purpose of slaughtering cattle and small stock, processing
=== PAGE 11 ===
by products, preparing hides and chilling, freezing, canning and storing beef, mutton, poultry and 
other meat foods for export or for consumption within Kenya. 
10)  Uplands Bacon Factory Act – An act of parliament to provide for the constitution of the Uplands 
Bacon Factory (Kenya) limited. 
11)  Cattle Cleansing Act – An act of parliament to provide for the cleansing of cattle. 
12)  Rabies Act – An act of parliament to provide for the suppression of rabies.  
13)  Animal Breeding Policy (in Draft form) – Aims to promote sustainable use, development and 
conservation of its domestic and emerging animal genetic resources. 
14)  Livestock feeds Policy (in Draft form) – Will detail standards that manufacturers have to maintain 
while making feeds. 
2.6 Coordination platforms to facilitate the value chain activities  
Frontier Counties Development Council (FCDC), has set up a Sector Forum for Agriculture & Livestock 
(SFAL) as an instrument to enhance cooperation, coordination and information flow between counties on 
issues related to Agriculture and Livestock. County Executive Committee Members (CECs) for the 
respective agriculture and livestock departments meet every three months, and the SFAL secretariat 
within FCDC implements requests and decisions taken by the Forum. This is the most relevant 
coordination platform to also coordinate activities along the meat value chain in the ASAL areas. 
2.7 An overview of existing abattoirs 
Various counties in the ASAL areas have the desire to export livestock and meat which has seen 
construction of export grade abattoirs in these areas. However, most of these abattoirs have not been 
finalized yet. There are a number of licensed abattoirs in Nairobi, its environs and in Mombasa as presented 
in Table 1. Almost all the abattoirs are operating below their full capacity while others are not in operation. 
Most of these abattoirs provide market for animals coming from the pastoral areas. Much of the meat 
from these abattoirs is sold locally to wholesalers and retailers. 
Table 1: Major licensed abattoirs in Nairobi and Mombasa end markets 
Abattoirs 
Catchment livestock markets 
Capacity 
Status 
Njiru 
Northeastern-Isiolo, Moyale and 
Garisa, 
Migori, 
Laikipia, 
Kitui, 
Mwingi  
100 cattle/day 
Operating  
Kiamaiko 
Garissa, Mandera, Marsabit, Isiolo 
Migori, Kuria, Suba Kajiado, Narok, 
Turkana, Samburu, 
200 shoats/per day 
Operating 
Neema  
Kajiado, Samburu, Isiolo, Narok and 
Baringo counties 
4,500 
heads 
of 
cattle/day. 
 
Operating  
 
Currently 
slaughtering 1,000 
goats and sheep 
and 900 cows per 
day
=== PAGE 12 ===
Abattoirs 
Catchment livestock markets 
Capacity 
Status 
Dagoreti 
Garissa, Mandera, Marsabit, Isiolo 
Migori, Kuria, Suba Kajiado, Narok, 
Turkana, 
Samburu, 
Kapenguria, 
Nandi, Kericho, Bomet, Laikipia 
Kitui, Mwingi, Machakos, Makueni 
400 cattle/day 
80% 
cattle 
and 
goats 50% sheep 
Mlolongo 
Garissa, Mandera, Marsabit, 
15 camels/day 
Closed 
Mariakani-Mombasa 
Not specified 
50 cattle/day 
Unknown 
Bisil 
Not specified 
50 cattle/day 
Unknown 
Kiserian 
Kajiado, Narok, Isiolo 
50–100 cattle/day and 
200 shoats/day 
50% 
cattle 
and 
65% shoats 
Ongata Rongai 
Not specified 
30 cattle/day and 
6–8 shoats/day 
Unknown 
Licensed Export Abattoirs 
Hurlingham 
Quality 
Meat Packers 
Not specified 
50 head of cattle 
Operating 
KMC Mombasa 
Marsabit, Wajir, Isiolo, Garissa, and 
the porous borders; Tanzania, 
Ethiopia, South Sudan, Uganda and 
Ethiopia 
300 head of cattle 
150 head cattle/ 
day 
KMC Athi River 
Marsabit, Wajir, Isiolo, Garissa, and 
the porous borders; Tanzania, 
Ethiopia, South Sudan, Uganda and 
Ethiopia 
1,000 head of cattle; 
1,200 sheep and goats 
on a three-shift basis 
1,000 cattle/ week; 
1,000 Shoats/day 
Halal-Ngong 
Not specified 
250 head cattle 
Closed 
New 
Mombasa 
Mnangoni 
Not specified 
120 head cattle 
Closed 
Farmers 
choice 
(pork) 
Country wide 
300 pigs 
Operating 
Choice 
Meat 
(subsidiary 
of 
Farmers Choice) 
Country wide 
150 head cattle 250 
sheep and goats/day 
70 head cattle/ 
Day 55 sheep and 
goats/day 
Kenmeat EPZ Limited Not specified 
Not specified 
Operating 
Deals with chilled, 
frozen 
and 
vacuumed 
meat 
products 
Source: Mbwika and Nthuli (2004); updated January 2012 as quoted in Farmer and Bwika (2012)
=== PAGE 13 ===
Table 2 gives an overview of the total stock of livestock in the country in comparison to the total number 
of animals slaughtered by licensed abattoirs. In general, very low off-take rates in form of slaughter is 
observed over different time periods for both cattle and shoats. For example, the total number of cattle 
slaughtered by licensed abattoirs as a percentage of total stock in the country ranges between 12 -14% 
for the entire period. For the shoats, the highest off take rate for period 2013 -2017 is 21% recorded in 
2017. This shows that there is limited purchase of live animals by licensed abattoirs in comparison to their 
capacities as indicated in Table 1. The proposed abattoirs in the ASAL counties are likely to suffer from 
the same problem of inadequate supply of live animals.  This will adversely affect the efficient utilization of 
meat processing capacity of the proposed export abattoirs in the ASAL areas. 
Table 2: Comparison of total stock and total number of slaughtered animals by Licensed Abattoirs 
Livestock Type 
 Year 
Total stock 
Total 
Slaughtered 
by 
Licensed 
Abattoirs 
Total slaughtered as 
a 
percentage 
of 
total stock (%) 
Cattle 
  
  
  
  
2013 
            
18,138,500  
               
2,147,300  
12 
2014 
            
18,247,632  
               
2,076,700  
11 
2015 
            
18,728,076  
               
2,274,500  
12 
2016 
            
20,529,190  
               
2,460,200  
12 
2017 
            
18,338,809  
               
2,590,000  
14 
Sheep and goats 
  
  
  
  
2013 
            
41,238,304  
               
6,084,800  
15 
2014 
            
44,595,265  
               
6,138,500  
14 
2015 
            
41,889,581  
               
6,560,800  
16 
2016 
            
45,729,676  
               
8,220,200  
18 
2017 
            
43,443,561  
               
9,206,700  
21 
Pigs 
  
  
  
  
2013 
                  
432,979  
                   
264,300  
61 
2014 
                  
430,844  
                   
257,200  
60 
2015 
                  
462,033  
                   
282,900  
61 
2016 
                  
504,395  
                   
313,600  
62
=== PAGE 14 ===
2017 
                  
554,301  
                   
360,100  
65 
Source: KNBS Statistical Abstract, 2018 and FAOSTAT, 2019 
3.0 Review of abattoir initiatives in the ASAL areas 
3.1 Projects undertaken by donors, the private and public sectors 
The World Bank has committed Ksh 800 million on equipping slaughterhouses in four counties to promote 
local and export market for livestock products. The abattoirs, which are part of the economic stimulus 
programme, are being constructed in Garissa, Wajir, Isiolo and Mandera counties.  
3.2 Benefits and opportunities offered by the abattoirs in ASAL areas 
The following benefits and opportunities are envisaged in the setting up of an export abattoir: 
Slaughter facilities: As a meat producing facility, the abattoir in the ASAL areas aims to change the business 
processes within the meat value chain from selling off the hoof (live animals), to selling slaughtered animals 
for increased profitability and market share.  
Drought response facilities: The purpose of an Abattoir is to help the pastoralists slaughter their animals and 
not suffer losses during the drought periods. It acts as a facility for early and immediate drought response 
by slaughter destocking through mobilizing livestock through the peripheral buying centers.  
 
3.3 Review of existing and proposed county abattoirs 
Another task in this assignment was to review existing and proposed County abattoirs in the ASAL 
counties so as to evaluate how the counties have proposed to respond to the infrastructure gaps in the 
meat market. We found a few reports and feasibility studies detailing the facts about the abattoirs in the 
ASAL counties. We have summarized some key points from the studies in Table 3. 
Table 3: Review of existing and proposed County abattoirs 
Study 
Key facts 
Marsabit County abattoir 
Proposed capacity: Kill and fabricate 700 animal units per week. 
Ownership: A partnership between the County Government Marsabit 
and potential investor is recommended to ensure coordination and 
representation of all stakeholders. 
Business model: Multi Species abattoir largely focusing on slaughter and 
basic animal and primal fabrication then move into value added 
fabrication in year 2. 
Estimated facility cost: Ksh 233 million. 
Opportunities: Ability to serve secondary processors (both county and 
national); Niche markets (i.e. ethnic, Halal); Regional value-added 
brand and emerging export markets in Africa, Asia and Africa. 
Threats: Competition for supply of livestock could be high due to 
initiatives by the neighbouring counties to also establish abattoir; 
livestock costs could be higher due to competition; national and 
international competition could increase thus rendering the new
=== PAGE 15 ===
Study 
Key facts 
facility less profitable and population expansion close to the facility 
location is probable. 
Isiolo County abattoir  
 
Proposed capacity: 1000 goats and sheep, 50 camels and 200 cattle per 
day. 
Ownership: The Slaughterhouse is owned by the ministry of 
Agriculture but upon completion it will be devolved to the county 
Government. 
Business model: Operate a dual processing strategy including toll 
processing and own brand. They propose to do slaughter and 
fabrication to customers that want to add value by further Processing 
(i.e. sausages, minced meat, burgers etc.). 
Estimated facility cost: Funded through the ministry of Agriculture 
under the economic Stimulus Programme and the African 
Development Bank (AfDB) at a cost of Kshs. 850 million 
Opportunities: No other facility in the area offering similar 
Services. 
Threats: Unexpected prolonged dry spells, cattle diseases, initial cash 
flows deficit, high strict international standards and other existing 
slaughterhouses. 
Nasukuta export abattoir, 
West Pokot 
Proposed capacity: Unknown. 
Ownership: West Pokot County. 
Business model: Multi Species abattoir. 
Estimated facility cost: Kshs 161 million, funded by the European 
Union, through the Ministry of Devolution and ASAL, under the EU-
IDEAS program. 
Lomidat abattoir, Turkana 
County 
Proposed capacity: Slaughter 300 bulls and 600 small livestock every 
month. 
Ownership: Managed by Lomidat Pastoral Multipurpose Co-operation 
Society (LPMCS), a community managed and owned abattoir. 
Business model: Multi Species abattoir. 
Estimated facility cost: Kshs 60 Million. 
Opportunities: The only abattoir capable of slaughtering for export, 
this can be utilized, and many animals could be collected and sent to 
Lomidat for slaughter and freezing. There is great potential and 
possibilities of airfreighting frozen meat to Nairobi, Kampala and Juba. 
Threats: Low off take rates by households. 
Source: Author’s compilation
=== PAGE 16 ===
4.0 Economic and market considerations for setting up 
abattoirs in ASAL areas 
If a county is to support establishment of an abattoir, the following considerations are of paramount 
consideration: 
i) 
Will there be a consistent supply of required quality of animals? 
ii) 
Does a steady demand for meat products exist in the target markets? 
Establishment of abattoirs in production areas will likely be economically viable if: 
i) 
Local demand is high so that the abattoir serves the local market; and 
ii) 
Processing, transportation, and storage costs are low to allow for competitively priced meat 
products to reach distant domestic, regional or international markets. These costs depend 
mostly on availability of energy and transportation infrastructure. Transport is critical for 
livestock markets and broader development, but costly. 
If an abattoir is viable in a given ASAL county, the county government support must be in the form of 
provision of public goods and services. In other words, public funds should not be invested in abattoirs. 
Instead, private risk capital should be encouraged to explore opportunities while the county government 
concentrates on creating an enabling environment for the private sector to thrive. For example, as 
highlighted, transport is critical for the development of livestock markets and broader development but 
costly. Therefore, county governments would do well to invest resources to reduce the costs and riskiness 
of transportation of refrigerated products. Poor transport infrastructure makes the marketing of some 
products such as offals very inefficient.  
In some cases, the quality of local animals may not meet the requirements of high end domestic and/or 
export markets and finishing of animals may have to take place in areas outside the ASALs. Focusing on 
export markets may require the establishment of disease-free zones, which are difficult to enforce at 
present and the low intensity of production makes them uneconomic. 
 In addition to transport and energy infrastructure, County government in collaboration with the National 
government should provide a conducive environment for commercial and NGO financing institutions to 
operate. This is because credit is critical for both producers and traders.  
It important to remember that modern slaughtering is only a minor step in the value chain, which may not 
have a major impact on the sector as a whole. A more comprehensive intervention by county governments 
would focus on increasing the availability of feed resources, animal health services and infrastructure. 
Therefore, having finishing and fattening of livestock as integral parts of the value chain may allow access 
to high value domestic and export markets in addition to provision of other services like security to the 
livestock traders. 
4.1 Main requirements and considerations in order to access key export 
markets 
Various importing countries have specific requirements which the counties who have established export 
abattoirs must meet in order to export. Some of the requirements are listed briefly in the next section. 
Disease free zones: Meat must come from a disease-free country, or a certified disease-free zone (DFZs), 
especially where BSE (Mad Cow Disease) is a threat. The establishment of DFZs is a flagship project within 
Kenya’s 2030 vision. The government expects to establish four DFZs by 2030. The first being at the Coast, 
covering the counties of Kwale, Mombasa, Kilifi, Tana River, Lamu and parts of Taita-Taveta. The other
=== PAGE 17 ===
three zones will be established in the Laikipia-Isiolo complex, Uasin Gishu and Garissa Counties. However, 
none of these has been established yet in the ASAL counties. 
Halal: All the animals must have been slaughtered in accordance with the Islamic law. In order 
To prove this, the processing plant must be certified by the Kenya Bureau of Halal Certification 
(KBHC). 
Meat Inspection Certificate: A “Meat Inspection Certificate”, issued by the government of the exporting 
country must be presented every time the product arrives to the importing country. Furthermore, the 
importing country`s authorities can carry out numerous inspections and controls to validate this 
certificate. 
Registered Exporter: The exporting company has to be registered as a licensed meat exporter. 
HACCP: The product, the processing facilities and the livestock management practices must meet the 
international quality standards for hygienic food handling aiming at preventing biological, chemical and 
physical hazards, ideally implementing the HACCP systematic approach (Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points) in all their processes. 
 
4.2 Options for sustainability of abattoirs in ASALs 
Several county governments have recently embarked on the formation and establishment of county 
regional economic blocs to foster development in their regions. Article189 of the 2010 Constitution of 
Kenya gives opportunities to governments at each level to cooperate and to set up joint authorities in 
performance of their functions, therefore enabling counties to forge collaborations to spur economic 
growth and development within their regions. The Frontier Counties Development Council (FCDC) is a 
regional economic bloc composed of the County Governments of Lamu, Tana River, Garissa, Wajir, 
Mandera, Marsabit, Isiolo, Turkana, Samburu and West Pokot.  The Council was formed in March 2016, 
when Governors from seven member counties signed a memorandum of understanding. The composition 
has since grown from 7-member counties to 10 as of September 2019.  
The Region-based development blocs are not new in Kenya. This has been practiced since early 1970s 
through establishment of Regional Development Authorities (RDAs). Their mandate is to plan, implement 
and coordinate development programmes in regions under their jurisdiction to ensure development 
through integrated planning and management.  
FCDC region has already embarked on joint projects demonstrating the potential benefits of intercounty 
collaboration. FCDC has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Water Sector Trust 
Fund (WSTF) for implementation of water related projects. The MoU offers investment opportunities in 
areas of rural water and sanitation, urban water and sanitation, water resource management, climate 
change and disaster management, result-based and commercial financing and research and special 
programmes. Through the FCDC, the counties in the ASAL areas can extend the collaborations to 
establishment and sustainability of the abattoirs. The ASAL counties need to pool together and tap into 
underexploited local and international markets. In order to enhance the collaboration, the ASAL counties 
need to enact enabling legislation to operationalize the FCDC and guide the management, distribution and 
sharing of resources. 
In addition to the collaborations among the counties through the economic blocs, the sustainability of the 
abattoirs can be enhanced by formalizing and improving the supply chain. A formalized market with clearly 
communicated prices and a shortened supply chain will allow pastoralists to realize higher sales prices and 
thus create incentives to supply more livestock. Through a higher level of industry formalization, we expect
=== PAGE 18 ===
to see greater supply efficiency and margins. Suppliers will realize that supplying cattle is an opportunity 
to generate a stable income and be incentivized to grow the domestic herd for meat production. ASAL 
counties could also collaborate with other counties in higher potential agro-ecological zones for 
establishment of feedlots and increase the supply of quality animals. 
5.0 Conclusions and recommendations 
The main objective of this study was to assess the economic viability of setting up additional abattoirs in 
the ASAL areas. The analysis is based on the review of literature obtained from different sources. Several 
significant conclusions are drawn from the reviews, which may provide useful insights towards the 
designing and implementation of strategies to ensure adequate market supply of quality live animals to 
meet export abattoirs processing needs. This also enhance efficiency and competitiveness of the meat 
industry. 
It is observed pastoralists in the ASAL areas have limited livestock holdings and limited market 
participation. The implication of limited livestock holdings and limited market participation is that under 
the current production and marketing conditions pastoral livestock production systems do not provide 
regular and adequate supply of quality live animals to the market, which adversely affect the efficient 
utilization of meat processing capacity of the existing export abattoirs. Furthermore, this analysis also 
indicates that the plan for the establishment of new export abattoirs in different ASAL counties has to 
proceed with great caution and careful assessment of the availability of live animals suitable for export 
abattoirs. 
Analysis of the detailed cost structure of export abattoirs was not within the scope of this study. However, 
it is very important that the proposed export abattoirs examine their operational efficiency and cost 
structures in order to improve their overall efficiency rather than just concentrating on the supply side 
constraints. In the future, a detailed study of cost structure for export abattoirs and a detailed analysis of 
the current livestock value chains will be required to identify entry points to increase livestock off take 
rates and reduce costs of operation.
=== PAGE 19 ===
6.0 References 
Asfaw Negassa and Jabbar M. 2008. Livestock ownership, commercial off-take rates and their determinants 
in Ethiopia. Research Report 9. ILRI (International Livestock Research Institute), Nairobi, Kenya. 
52 pp. 
Behnke, R. and Muthami, D. 2011. The contribution of livestock to the Kenyan economy. IGAD LPI Working 
Paper. Intergovernmental authority for development in Eastern Africa. IGAD LPI Communications 
Office. 
Bosire, C.K., Lannerstad, M., de Leeuw, J., Kror, M.S., Ogutu, O.O., Ochungo, P.A. and Hoekstra, A.J. 
2017. Urban consumption of meat and milk and its green and blue water footprints-patterns in the 1980s 
and 2000s for Nairobi, Kenya. Science of The Total Environment 579:786–796. 
Carron, Maud, Pablo Alarcon, Maurice Karani, Patrick Muinde, James Akoko, Joshua Onono, Eric M. Fèvre, 
Barbara Häsler, and Jonathan Rushton. 2017. “The Broiler Meat System in Nairobi, Kenya: Using 
a Value Chain Framework to Understand Animal and Product Flows, Governance and Sanitary 
Risks.” 
Preventive 
Veterinary 
Medicine 
147 
(November): 
90–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2017.08.013. 
EPZA. 2005. Meat Production in Kenya, Export Processing Zones Authority. 
FAO. 2019. Food and agriculture organization of the United Nations statistical databases. See 
http://faostat.fao.org/. 
Farmer, E. and Mbwika, J. 2012. End market analysis of Kenyan livestock and meat: A desk study. A micro 
report No. 184. USAID. 
International Development(I-Dev). 2014. Kenya livestock and meat market analysis for cattle, goat and sheep. 
Kenya Market Trust, p56. 
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. 2009. Kenya population and housing census. Nairobi, Kenya: Kenya 
National Bureau of Statistics. 
Naitos Golden Inspiration. 2015. Livestock value chain study for Garissa county. REGAL-IR, p78.
=== PAGE 20 ===
7.0 Annexes 
7.1 Case study of a Lomidat abattoir in Turkana county 
The central role of the Lomidat Abattoir in the Turkana Livestock Industry  
In this section, the potential for adoption and replication of The Lomidat Abattoir Market/Business Model 
in other sub counties of Turkana was examined, by assessing the implications, costs and possible benefits 
both in the short and long run.  
Lomidat was built in 2006 at a cost of Kshs 60 Million by AMREF Italy and Terra Nuova with funding from 
the Italian Government. It is managed by Lomidat Pastoral Multipurpose Co-operation Society (LPMCS) a 
community managed and owned abattoir about 9 km from the town of Lokichoggio that serves the needs 
of pastoralists in the County. Lomidat is the only abattoir in the whole Turkana County designed to 
slaughter meat for export. The other numerous slaughter slabs in Turkana cannot slaughter meat for 
export. Its current capacity are 50 cattle and 200 shoats per day, but with a potential target to slaughter 
300 bulls and 600 small livestock every month. However, it is only managing 50 bulls and 300 shoats every 
two months. Thus, currently the abattoir is underutilized.  
The Lomidat Abattoir seeks to meet the socio-economic needs of the pastoralist livestock farmers by 
linking the livestock markets to the abattoir. It produces high integrity export quality meat and meat 
products sustainably.  
The benefits and opportunities offered by the Lomidat abattoir operational model  
Slaughter facilities: As a meat producing facility, Lomidat abattoir aims to change the business processes 
within the meat value chain from selling off the hoof (live animals), to selling slaughtered animals for 
increased profitability and market share. The Lomidat abattoir in Turkana, northern Kenya has modern 
slaughter facilities and well-trained personnel. It is a state-of-the-art facility that provides pastoralists with 
ready markets for their produce. Prime cuts of meat, sausages and striped meat are among the Lomidat 
abattoir ‘s products.  
Cottage industries: Lomidat abattoir utilizes bones, horns, hides and skins to make valuable products and 
art crafts; and makes soap from waste fat.  
Biltong is traditional dried meat known as ngatosa among the Turkana community is also produced at 
Lomidat Abattoir.  
Satellite market centres: Lomidat has built five satellite market centres equipped with weighing scales to buy 
and collect animals for the abattoir in these areas: iKanakurudio, Letea, Lokangae, Lokori and 
Namouroputh. A sales yard at Kakuma has been rehabilitated. Each of these have minor infrastructure 
such loading ramps and scales. There are set auction days in order to create a permanent market linkage. 
These are being transformed into live animal markets established and operated by the cooperative. 
Through this, Lomidat abattoir aims to ensure a regular supply of animals for slaughter, become a centre 
for grading and testing animals, while the market is an alternative source of income. 
Drought response facilities: The original purpose of Lomidat Abattoir construction was to help the 
pastoralists slaughter their animals and not suffer losses during the drought periods. The facility was 
established as a not-for- profit venture. It acts as a facility for early and immediate drought response by
=== PAGE 21 ===
slaughter destocking through mobilizing livestock through the peripheral buying centres at Letea, 
Lokangae, Kakuma, Kanakurudio, Lokori and Namouruputh. The original purpose has now been expanded 
into a profit-making organization.  
Extending reach by mobilizing suppliers: The Lomidat Pastoral Multipurpose Co-operative Society Ltd raises 
awareness on market opportunities for livestock in livestock holding-grounds and pastoralists ‘kraals to 
identify potential sellers and sensitize them on prices and purchase runs by the abattoir truck.  
Promoting fodder banks: Terra Nuova and Vétérinaires Sans Frontières-Belgium worked with the Lomidat 
abattoir to promote through farmer field school fodder production of various native grasses: Cenchrus 
ciliaris, Chrysopogon plumulosus, Cymbopogon sp., Enteropogon macrostachyus, Sehima nervosum and Eragrostis 
superba in Naweregai, Kapelbok, Lorus, Riokomor, Pokot Central, Amolem and Termach. Fodder seeds 
are harvested and propagated to new areas whilst the harvest grasses are transformed into hay bales.  
Refrigerated trucks for meat transport: Meat is a highly perishable product with a short shelf life. Lomidat has 
cooling facilities and a refrigerated truck to transport meat to distant and secure extra county markets in 
Nairobi and Juba. Maintaining this cold chain has opened up new markets for the pastoralists of Turkana, 
allowing them to compete on product quality and safety in the cities. This has the advantage to having the 
full value of the animal in terms of by-products within the county.  
Reducing the distance to be covered: The distance from the Turkana pastoralist to the market has been 
reduced by establishing markets or processing facilities closer to the producers. The Lomidat abattoir 
provides a market close to the producers in the district through the five-satellite market centres.  
Foci of youth training: Lomidat has been a centre of transition of training the youth in skills at meat training 
institutes as well as in handicraft manufacture amongst others. Butchers and flayers (who do the 
slaughtering and cut the carcass into halves) recruited from the local community have attended training at 
the Meat Training Institute and the Kenya Meat Commission. Other training has covered hygiene, 
occupational safety, first aid, animal health, HIV/AIDS, and craftwork using bone.  
Conferring ownership on local people and encouraging investment and commitment by local people: The Lomidat 
Pastoral Multipurpose Co-operative Society, which runs the Lomidat abattoir, is a hybrid of a cooperative 
and a company. While it was established with donor funds, it is owned by the 1,600 cooperative members 
who have bought shares and who earn dividends when it earns a profit. The cooperatives have the 
possibility of raising capital from their members by charging membership fees and through sales of shares. 
This has helped the pastoralists get organized and to retain them occupy a key position in the marketing 
chain.  
Improving gender equity: Pastoralist women are often ignored in development. Lomidat is unique in the 
sense that women are three-fifths of the members of the Lomidat Pastoral Multipurpose Co-operative, 
which supplies animals to the Lomidat abattoir in Kenya.  
Local government participation: The Turkana county government and The Turkana County Council have 
played a very constructive role in providing about 1,000 hectares of land to the cooperative. The county 
government is keen on providing KSh10 million to the abattoir to support the project.
=== PAGE 22 ===
Constraints to the Lomidat model  
Supply of live animals is a major challenge for Lomidat and currently animals are sourced from Lokangai, 
and Kibish. A low offtake level per household among the livestock producers is a problem because 
livestock are not kept as commercial produce but as investment and wealth. In order to get the required 
volumes Lomidat has to go to many places and build the bulk by collecting a few animals at a time. Lomidat 
requires 300 steers and 600goats per day to be viable. Currently Lomidat is working with a trader in 
Lokanga who collects 50-60 goats and sells to Lomidat. Lomidat sends a vehicle to collect the animals for 
slaughter from the production areas. Lomidat is looking for such agents in Oropoi and other areas. 
Lomidat is working with LMA and VSF Germany in Lorugum. Referral centres have been constructed in 
these areas where livestock are weighed, and traders paid according to live weight. This system is not 
functional because the producers and traders are not happy with the live weight payment system.  
In November 2013 the abattoir was closed due to a conflict between the abattoir management and the 
community. The conflict centered on: -  
(i) the price that Lomidat offered for livestock that was considered by the community to be lower than 
that in the live animal market, and (ii) Lomidat was not paying cash to producers. In February 2014, 
PALFINGER from Austria invested KSh 11 million to support procurement of livestock on a cash basis. 
This was the situation as at May 2014.  
In a stakeholder workshop the Lomidat manager explained how the abattoir seeks to ensure that 
producers get the best price for their livestock and not sell their animals in barter trade. In Lokanagai 
pastoralists use barter trade for their animals and get very little value from such trade. Lomidat believes 
that the livestock prices that producers get from traders are not competitive, and that the traders are the 
people benefiting from the livestock trading business at the expense of producers.  
Producers and traders need to be trained in the weight system slowly but surely and carefully for them 
to accept it and adopt it. The problem is that as long as the live weight price is lower than the visual price, 
traders and producers will not use the system; because they will incur losses.  
Analysis of the Lomidat business model  
Lomidat‘s major clients are Tullow Oil; BGB Kenya: big and smaller hotels in Lokichogio; Nairobi market; 
Muthaiga and Alpha Fine Foods; Sudan Juba market; the Nairobi Market and the Lodwar market. Lomidat 
is currently transporting 500 kg/week slaughtered animals to Sudan. The Sudan market is attractive to 
Lomidat because the price mark-up is higher although the volume is small. There is there is too much 
competition in the Nairobi market which is discouraging for Lomidat. Lomidat has plans to build a depot 
the Lodwar market as their expansion program and strategy.  
Lomidat could pay a very significant and central role in the Turkana livestock industry with proper 
coordination structures and linkages with the LMA and CMLC. Being the only abattoir capable of 
slaughtering for export, this can be utilized, and many animals could be collected and sent to Lomidat for 
slaughter and freezing. There is great potential and possibilities of airfreighting frozen meat to Nairobi, 
Kampala and Juba. This could resolve the livestock raids problems that have almost crippled the Turkana 
livestock industry.
=== PAGE 23 ===
Based on the above, the study examined whether the adoption and replication of the Lomidat Abattoir 
Market/Business Model in other sub counties in Turkana is possible; the Implications, costs and possible 
benefits both in the short and long run.  
Kakuma has a population just over 125,000. Kakuma Refugee Camp serves refugees who have been 
forcibly displaced from their home countries due to war or persecution. It was established in 1992 to 
serve Sudanese refugees, and has since expanded to serve refugees from Somalia, Ethiopia, Burundi, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Uganda, and Rwanda. Kakuma camp, in Turkana County, is 
receiving record numbers of refugees for the second consecutive year. Over 14,000 new arrivals had 
registered as asylum-seekers by the end of August 2013, joining another 21,000 who arrived in 2012. 
These refugees are coming mainly from South Sudan. With its total population approaching 125,000, 
Kakuma meat consumption and demand has increased drastically. There exist two livestock markets in 
Kakuma, the formal market conducted at the Kakuma livestock sale yard under the Livestock Marketing 
Association (LMA) and the informal Livestock Market conducted at the Kakuma Refugee Camp. Large 
numbers of livestock are sold and slaughtered at the Kakuma refugee Camp compared to the Kakuma 
Livestock sale yard.  
Lodwar has a population of approximately 48,316. These two towns have the most important ingredient 
for establishing an abattoir that is - a fairly large population therefore meat market.  
Lokichar with a population of 44,233 is the third likely town due it its likely growth with the high-income 
earning staff at Tullow oil.  
However, the very high cost of building high end abattoirs (KSh 60 million) is not sustainable. In addition, 
the model combines cattle and goat slaughter whereas Turkana is a goat country and should focus on 
goat. The study recommends evaluation of the government slaughter-slabs and houses by improving 
hygiene and inspection, construction meat cutting facilities for butchers, skin bulking, and ornament 
making. Lomidat should open an on the job training component for retaining of local slaughter men, flayers 
and meat handlers.  
There are proposals to construct additional abattoirs in Turkana, but these are likely to be white elephants 
without a sizable market. Three abattoirs are to be constructed through the economic stimulus program 
Lokichar, Lokitauang and Lorgum. We should avoid ―we want a big one like Lomidat syndrome‖ approach. 
The Lomidat abattoir is currently underutilized and the process should allow this abattoir to operate to 
full capacity before establishing another abattoir.
