=== PAGE 1 ===
AFRICA DEVELOPMENT FORUM
Light Manufacturing 
in Africa
Targeted Policies to Enhance 
Private Investment and Create Jobs
Hinh T. Dinh, Vincent Palmade, 
Vandana Chandra, and Frances Cossar
=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===
Light Manufacturing 
in Africa
=== PAGE 4 ===

=== PAGE 5 ===
Targeted Policies to Enhance 
Private Investment and 
Create Jobs
Hinh T. Dinh
Vincent Palmade
Vandana Chandra
Frances Cossar
Light Manufacturing 
in Africa
A copublication of the Agence Française de Développement and the World Bank
=== PAGE 6 ===
© 2012 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development 
Association or The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
1 2 3 4  15 14 13 12 
This volume is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The ﬁ ndings, inter-
pretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reﬂ ect the views of The World 
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, 
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judg-
ment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or 
acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of 
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as 
full attribution to the work is given.
For permission to reproduce any part of this work for commercial purposes, please send a request 
with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Ofﬁ ce 
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; 
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
ISBN: 978-0-8213-8961-4
eISBN: 978-0-8213-8974-4
DOI: 10.1596/978-0-8213-8961-4
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Light manufacturing in Africa : targeted policies to enhance private investment and create jobs / 
by Hinh T. Dinh . . . [et al.].
  p.  cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-8213-8961-4 — ISBN 978-0-8213-8974-4 (electronic)
 1. Manufacturing industries—Africa, Sub-Saharan. 2. Manufacturing industries—Government 
policy—Africa, Sub-Saharan. 3. Industrial policy—Africa, Sub-Saharan. 4. Africa, Sub-Saharan—
Economic conditions—Congresses. I. Dinh, Hinh T., 1953– 
 HD9737.A3572L54 2012
 338.4'7670967—dc23
 
2011045309
Cover photo by Arne Hoel.
Cover design: Debra Naylor of Naylor Design.
=== PAGE 7 ===
Africa Development Forum Series
The Africa Development Forum series was created in 2009 to focus on issues 
of signiﬁ cant relevance to Sub-Saharan Africa’s social and economic develop-
ment. Its aim is both to record the state of the art on a speciﬁ c topic and to 
contribute to ongoing local, regional, and global policy debates. It is designed 
speciﬁ cally to provide practitioners, scholars, and students with the most up-
to-date research results while highlighting the promise, challenges, and oppor-
tunities that exist on the continent.
The series is sponsored by the Agence Française de Développement and the 
World Bank. The manuscripts chosen for publication represent the highest 
quality in each institution’s research and activity output and have been selected 
for their relevance to the development agenda. Working together with a shared 
sense of mission and interdisciplinary purpose, the two institutions are com-
mitted to a common search for new insights and new ways of analyzing the 
development realities of the Sub-Saharan Africa region.
Advisory Committee Members
Agence Française de Développement
Pierre Jacquet, Directeur de 1a Stratégie et Chef Économiste
Robert Peccoud, Directeur de la Recherche
World Bank
Shantayanan Devarajan, Chief Economist, Africa Region
=== PAGE 8 ===
Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: World Bank.
ZIMBABWE
ANGOLA
BURUNDI
RWANDA
CHAD
NIGER
UGANDA
KENYA
SOMALIA
ETHIOPIA
ERITREA
SUDAN
SOUTH
SUDAN
CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC
CONGO
NIGERIA
TOGO
SENEGAL
LIBERIA
SIERRA LEONE
GUINEA
CÔTE
D’IVOIRE
GUINEA-BISSAU
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
OF CONGO
SOUTH
AFRICA
LESOTHO
SWAZILAND
BOTSWANA
ZAMBIA
MOZAMBIQUE
MADAGASCAR
COMOROS
SEYCHELLES
MALAWI
TANZANIA
NAMIBIA
MAURITIUS
CAMEROON
GABON
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE
MALI
BENIN
BURKINA FASO
MAURITANIA
CAPE
VERDE
THE GAMBIA
GHANA
Réunion
(Fr.)
Mayotte
(Fr.)
IBRD 39088
=== PAGE 9 ===
vii
Foreword 
xiii 
Acknowledgments 
xv
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
xvii
Overview
  
Light Manufacturing in Africa: Targeted Policies to 
Enhance Private Investment and Create Jobs 
1
Potential for Light Manufacturing: Creating Millions of 
Productive Jobs 3
Case Study: Ethiopia 4
African Competitiveness in Light Manufacturing and Possible 
Solutions from Asia 12
References 18
Part 1
Setting the Stage 
19
1 Good Possibilities for Light Manufacturing in 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
21
Structural Transformation 21
Light Manufacturing, Including Agribusiness, as a Possible Driver 
of Africa’s Structural Transformation 25
Does Sub-Saharan Africa Have a Comparative Advantage in 
Light Manufacturing?  26
Africa’s Performance in Light Manufacturing  32
Strategy for a Competitive Light Manufacturing Sector in 
Sub-Saharan Africa 39
Past Policy Prescriptions: An Intimidating “To Do” List 44
Contents
=== PAGE 10 ===
viii 
 
CONTENTS
A Selective and Practical Approach: Resolve the Most Critical Constraints 
in the Most Promising Subsectors 46
Notes 48
References 50
Part 2
What Constrains Light Manufacturing in Sub-Saharan Africa? 53
Main Constraints in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia 54
Note 56
References 56
2 Input Industries 57
Effects of Input Costs on Competitiveness 57
Why Are Input Costs Higher? 59
Possible Solutions from Asia 62
Policy Recommendations 63
References 65
3 Industrial Land 
67
Effects of Industrial Land on Competitiveness 67
Marketing of Goods: Land for Warehousing, Showrooms, and Trading 
Inputs and Outputs 70
A Possible Solution from Asia 71
Policy Recommendations for Africa 73
Notes 75
References 75
4 Finance 
77
Access to Finance and Firm Performance 77
The Availability and Cost of Finance 78
Why Is the Cost of Formal Finance So High 
and the Availability So Constricted? 80
Possible Solutions from Asia 82
Notes 84
References 84
=== PAGE 11 ===
CONTENTS 
 
ix
5 Trade Logistics 
85
Why Are Trade Logistics So Important to Competitiveness in 
Light Manufacturing? 85
Trade Logistics Performance 86
Factors Leading to Poor Trade Logistics in Africa 88
Possible Solutions from Asia 90
References 90
6 Skills 
93
Entrepreneurial Skills 93
Worker Skills 101
Possible Solutions from Asia 103
Notes 103
References 104
7 Implementation 
107
Competition 108
Public-Private Partnerships 109
High-Level Government Commitment 110
The Role of Development Partners 110
Governance and the Political Economy of Reforms 110
Part 3
Identifying the Potential and Easing the Constraints 
111
8 Ethiopia as Exemplar 
113
Apparel: Solving Trade Logistics Issues 115
Leather Products: Dealing with Shortages of Quality Leather 120
Wood Products: Providing Technical Training and Developing 
Sustainable Wood Plantations 124
Metal Products: Reducing the Cost of Steel and Providing Technical 
Training 126
Agribusiness: Reforming Key Agricultural Input and Output Markets 
and Facilitating Access to Land and Finance 128
Synthesis across the Five Subsectors in Light Manufacturing 130
=== PAGE 12 ===
x 
 
CONTENTS
Implementing Reform 134
Political Economy Issues 136
Notes 141
References 141
 
Annex
 
The Study’s Objectives and Methods 
143
Industry and Country Focus 143
Methodology 145
Enterprise Survey Studies 145
Qualitative Survey 146
Quantitative Survey 147
Comparative Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis 148
Kaizen Training 149
Note 150
References 150
 
Index  
151
=== PAGE 13 ===
CONTENTS 
 
xi
Boxes
3.1 
Why Have Industrial Parks Failed in Africa?  
73
6.1 
Ethiopia’s Success in Farming Roses  
100
8.1 
Analytical Tools  
115
8.2 
The Role of FDI in Chinese Manufacturing and Apparel 
Industries 
133
Figures
1.1 
Employment in Agriculture and Income in Select Countries, 2008 
22
1.2 
Economic Structure in Select Sub-Saharan African Countries, 
Various Years, 1960–2010 
24 
1.3 
Share of Sub-Saharan Africa in Global Production and Exports, 
1980 and 2005 
25
1.4 
Labor Productivity per Worker in Select Countries, 2005 
31
1.5 
Top Five Exports from Select Economies in Sub-Saharan Africa 
and Asia, 1980 and 2009  
36
1.6 
Labor Productivity and Average Wage Rates in Manufacturing 
in China, 1979–2009 
43
II.1 
Sources of Excess Production Costs of Medium Firms in Africa: 
Average across Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia as a Percentage 
of Chinese Production Cost 
55
2.1 
Impact of Higher Input Costs on Total Production Costs in 
Relation to China 
58
4.1 
Collateral Requirements in the Five Countries 
82
4.2 
Gross Domestic Savings as a Percentage of GDP in the 
Five Countries, 1985–2009 
83
5.1 
Impact of Poor Trade Logistics on Total Production Costs, 
by Sector 
86
5.2 
Logistics Performance Index and Annual Labor Costs per 
Worker in Apparel Production in Select Countries, 2010 
87
6.1 
Level of Education of Firm Owners in the Five Countries 
95
8.1 
Costs to Produce a Polo Shirt in Ethiopia Compared with 
Costs in China 
117
8.2 
Costs to Produce Leather Shoes in Ethiopia Compared with 
Costs in China 
121
=== PAGE 14 ===
Tables
1 
Constraints in Ethiopia, by Importance, Size of Firm, and Sector 
9
2 
Proposed Policy Measures in Ethiopia 
10
1.1 
Monthly Wages in the Light Manufacturing Sectors of 
Five Countries, by Skill Level 
27
1.2 
Labor Productivity in the Light Manufacturing Sectors of 
Five Countries 
30
1.3 
Level of Industrialization, by Region, 1960s–2000s 
32
1.4 
Share of Manufactures in Total Exports in Select Countries 
in Africa and Asia, 1990–94 and 2005–09 
34
1.5 
Top 10 Non-Oil Exports of China, 1980–84 and 2004–08 
35
2.1 
Wheat Prices in the Five Countries, 2010 Average 
59
2.2 
Pine Lumber Prices in the Five Countries 
62
4.1 
Percentage of Firms That Could Borrow to Purchase Additional 
Machinery, Equipment, or Vehicles in the Five Countries, 
by Source 
78
4.2 
Source of Funding for the Purchase of Machinery, Equipment, 
or Vehicles in the Five Countries 
79
4.3 
Source of Funding for Innovation in the Five Countries 
79
4.4 
Percentage of Firms That Have Borrowed in the Five Countries, 
by Source, 2006–10 
80
5.1 
Time and Cost of Trading across Borders in the Five Countries 
87
5.2 
Four Main Factors That Impair Trade Logistics in the 
Five Countries 
88
6.1 
Firm Size and Assistance Received at Start of Business 
96
6.2 
Labor Efﬁ ciency in the Five Countries 
102
8.1 
Benchmarking the Cost of Consumables per Chair in the 
Five Countries  
125
8.2 
Attributes of Local and Cross-Breed Cows 
129
8.3 
Constraints in Ethiopia, by Importance, Size of Firm, and Sector 132
8.4 
Domestic Resource Cost Ratios in Ethiopia 
135
8.5 
Estimated Fiscal Costs and Political Economy Feasibility of the 
Proposed Measures 
138
xii 
 
CONTENTS
=== PAGE 15 ===
xiii
The World Bank’s strategy for Africa’s Future recognizes the central importance 
of industrialization in Sub-Saharan Africa, and the consequent creation of pro-
ductive jobs for Africans, which have long been a preoccupation of African lead-
ers and policy makers. This book represents an attempt to address these issues. 
The book stresses that, while the recent turnaround in Africa’s economic 
growth is encouraging, this growth must be accompanied by structural trans-
formation to be sustainable and to create productive employment for its peo-
ple. For many African countries, this transformation involves lifting workers 
from low-productivity agriculture and informal sectors into higher productiv-
ity activities. Light manufacturing can offer a viable solution for Sub-Saharan 
Africa, given its potential competitiveness that is based on low wage costs and an 
abundance of natural resources that supply raw materials needed for industries. 
With ﬁ ve different analytical tools and data sources, this book addresses 
the binding constraints in each of the ﬁ ve subsectors it covers: apparel, leather 
goods, metal products, agribusiness, and wood products. Ethiopia is used as 
an example, with Vietnam as a comparator and China as a benchmark, and 
with insights from Tanzania and Zambia to draw out lessons more broadly for 
Sub-Saharan Africa. The text recommends a program of focused policies to 
exploit Africa’s latent comparative advantage in certain light manufacturing 
industries—in particular, leather goods, garments, and agricultural processing. 
These industries could initiate rapid, substantial, and potentially self-propelling 
waves of rising output, employment, productivity, and exports that can push 
countries like Ethiopia onto a path of structural change of the sort recently 
achieved in both China and Vietnam.  The timing for these initiatives is appro-
priate because China’s advantage in these areas is diminishing due to steep cost 
increases associated with rising wages and non-wage labor costs, escalating land 
prices, and mounting regulatory costs. 
This is the ﬁ rst research project based on the New Structural Econom-
ics, and it has ﬁ ve features that distinguish it from previous studies. First, the 
Foreword
=== PAGE 16 ===
xiv 
 
FOREWORD
detailed work on light manufacturing at the subsector and product levels in 
ﬁ ve countries provide in-depth cost comparisons between Asia and Africa that 
can be used as a framework for future studies. Second, building on a growing 
body of work, the project uses a wide array of quantitative and qualitative tech-
niques, including quantitative surveys and value chain analysis, to identify key 
constraints to enterprises and to evaluate ﬁ rm performance differences across 
countries. Third, the ﬁ ndings that ﬁ rm constraints vary by country, sector, and 
ﬁ rm size led to a focused approach to identifying constraints and combining 
market-based measures and select government intervention to remove them. 
Fourth, the solution to light manufacturing problems cuts across many sec-
tors and does not lie only in manufacturing. Solving the manufacturing inputs 
problem requires solving speciﬁ c issues in agriculture, education, and infra-
structure. African countries cannot afford to wait until all the problems across 
all sectors are resolved, thus making this focused approach valuable.  Fifth, the 
study draws on experiences and solutions from other developing countries to 
inform its recommendations. 
We hope that the report, part of the World Bank’s knowledge creation and 
dissemination program, will contribute in a practical way to spur the creation 
of productive jobs in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Justin Yifu Lin 
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Sr. Vice President and Chief Economist 
Vice President
Development Economics 
Africa Region
The World Bank 
The World Bank
=== PAGE 17 ===
xv
Acknowledgments
Under the guidance of Oby Ezekwesili (Vice President, AFR) and Justin Lin 
(Senior Vice President, DEC and World Bank Chief Economist) this report was 
prepared by a core team consisting of Hinh T. Dinh (Lead Economist, Team 
Leader and Lead Author), Vincent Palmade (Lead Economist and Co-Team 
Leader), Vandana Chandra (Sr. Economist), Frances Cossar (Junior Profes-
sional), Tugba Gurcanlar (Consultant), Ali Zafar (Sr. Economist), and Gabriela 
Calderon Motta (Program Assistant). The larger team responsible for the report 
includes, in addition to the above staff, George Clarke (Texas A&M Interna-
tional University), Kathleen Fitzgerald, Ying Li, Thomas Rawski (University of 
Pittsburgh), H. Colin Xu, Yutaka Yoshino, and Douglas Zeng (Washington); 
Marcel Fafchamps and Simon Quinn (Oxford University, England); Anders 
Isaksson (UNIDO, Austria), Mesﬁ n Girma Bezawagaw, Nebel Kellow, Menbere 
Taye Tesfa (Ethiopia); Le Duy Binh, Pham Thai Hung, and Doan Hong Quang 
(Vietnam); Lihong Wang (China); George Gandye, Josaphat Paul Kweka, and 
Michael Ndanshau (Tanzania); Tetsushi Sonobe and Aya Suzuki (The National 
Graduate Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS), Japan); the Global Development 
Solutions team (Washington); Yasuo Konishi, David Philipps, Glenn Surabian, 
Atdhe Veliu, John Weiss, Nebiye Gessese, and Christine Elbert; and Precise Con-
sult team (Ethiopia). The work was carried out with the support and guidance 
of Zia Qureshi (Director, DECOS), Marilou Uy (Sr. Advisor, MDM and For-
mer Director, AFTFP), Gaiv Tata (Director, AFTFP), Shanta Devarajan (Chief 
Economist, AFR), Greg Toulmin (Acting Country Director, Ethiopia), Ann E. 
Harrison (Former Director, DECVP), Asli Demirguc-Kunt (Director, DECVP), 
and Shahrokh Fardoust (Former Director, DECOS).
The report also beneﬁ ted from key inputs from government ofﬁ cials in Ethi-
opia, Tanzania, Zambia, China, and Vietnam as well as from hundreds of private 
sector entrepreneurs interviewed in these ﬁ ve countries. In Ethiopia, we thank 
H. E. Ato Neway Gebre-Ab (Chief Economic Adviser to the Prime Minister), 
H. E. Ato Suﬁ an Ahmed (Minister of Finance and Economic Development),
=== PAGE 18 ===
xvi 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H. E. Ato Mekonnen Manyazewal (Minister of Industry), and H. E. Ato Tadesse 
Haile (State Minister for Industry) for their valuable comments. In China, we 
thank Messrs. Gao Fu and Li Qiang of the Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology (MIIT), as well as ofﬁ cials from Jiangxi and Zhejiang Provinces, 
particularly Mr. Junming Wan, Ms. Huan Ren, and the Chinese Association of 
Development Zones for arranging the enterprise visits and for carrying out the 
quantitative survey in China. In Vietnam, we thank the Vietnam Chamber of 
Commerce, particularly Dr. Pham Thi Thu Hang, for organizing the enterprise 
visits and for executing the quantitative survey.
Throughout the preparation of this report, the team received valuable 
advice and guidance from an external advisory committee consisting of Yaw 
Ansu (African Center for Economic Transformation), Augusto Luis Alcorta 
(UNIDO), William Lewis (Founding Director, McKinsey Global Institute), 
Howard Pack (University of Pennsylvania), Jean-Philippe Platteau (Universite 
of Namure, Brussels), Kei Otsuka (The National Graduate Institute for Policy 
Studies (GRIPS), Japan), John Sutton (London School of Economics), Alan 
Gelb and Vijaya Ramachandran (Center for Global Development).
The peer reviewers are Ann E. Harrison, Ioannis N. Kessides, John Murray 
Mcintire, David McKenzie, Brian Pinto, Vijaya Ramachandran, and Tunc Tahsin 
Uyanik. In addition, the team has beneﬁ ted from comments by Asya Akhlaque, 
Jean Francois Arvis, Paul Brenton, Hai-Anh Dang, Nora Dihel, Doerte Dome-
land, Michael O. Engman, Thomas Farole, Gary Fine, M. Louise Fox, Ian Gill-
son, Alvaro Gonzales, Michael Fuchs, Mombert Hoppe, Xiaofeng Hua, Leon-
ardo Iacovone, Guiseppe Iarossi, Celestin Monga, Dominique Njinkeu, Paul 
Noumba, Gael Raballand, Ganesh Rasagam, José Guilherme Reis, Frank Sader, 
Marie Sheppard, Van-Can Thai, Papa Demba Thiam, Pham Van Thuyet, Volker 
Treichel, James M. Trevino, Dileep Wagle, and Chunlin Zhang.
The report was edited by a team headed by Bruce Ross-Larson at Commu-
nications Development. Earlier drafts were edited by Alison Strong and Paul 
Holtz. Financial support from MDTF, BNPP, PHRD, and UNIDO is gratefully 
acknowledged. The World Bank’s Ofﬁ ce of the Publisher (External Affairs) han-
dled the production of the ﬁ nal printed volume under the guidance of Susan 
Graham, Stephen McGroarty, and Nora Ridolﬁ .
=== PAGE 19 ===
xvii
AGOA  
African Growth and Opportunity Act
COMESA  
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
DRC  
domestic resource cost
EU  
European Union
FDI  
foreign direct investment
f.o.b.  
free-on-board 
GDP  
gross domestic product
IGAD  
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
KfW  
German Development Bank
PPP 
purchasing power parity
PTA 
Preferential Trade Area for Eastern and Southern Africa
USAID  
U.S. Agency for International Development
Abbreviations and Acronyms
=== PAGE 20 ===
Light Manufacturing 
in Africa Study 
MAIN REPORT
Volume I
Light Manufacturing in Africa (in print and on the Web) presents the 
ﬁ ndings of the Ethiopian study, with lessons for Tanzania, Zambia, and 
Sub-Saharan Africa. 
BACKGROUND PAPERS
Volume II
Comparative Value Chain Analysis by Global Development Solutions, Inc. 
presents detailed value chain analyses for speciﬁ c light manufacturing products 
for Ethiopia, Tanzania, Zambia, as well as China and Vietnam. 
Volume III 
Results from the Quantitative Firm Survey by Fafchamps and Quinn.
The Binding Constraint on Firms’ Growth in Developing Countries by Dinh, 
Mavridis, and Nguyen.
Explaining Africa’s (Dis) Advantage by Harrison, Lin and Xu.
Assessing How the Investment Climate Affects Firm Performance in Africa 
by Clarke.
Wages and Productivity in Manufacturing in Africa: Some Stylized Facts 
by Clarke.
Volume IV
Kaizen for Managerial Skills Improvement in Small and Medium 
Enterprises by Sonobe, Suzuki, and Otsuka.
All volumes can be found online at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing.
=== PAGE 21 ===
Overview
After stagnating for most of the past 45 years, economic performance in Sub-
Saharan Africa is at a turning point. Between 2001 and 2010 the region’s gross 
domestic product grew at an average of 5.2 percent a year and per capita 
income grew at 2 percent a year, up from –0.4 percent in the previous 10 years. 
The reforms of the 1990s that focused on macroeconomic stability and liber-
alization began to gain traction. Between 2001 and 2010 net ﬂ ows of foreign 
direct investment totaled about US$33 billion—almost ﬁ ve times the US$7 
billion total between 1990 and 1999—and export growth was robust (World 
Bank 2011). 
Experience elsewhere shows that this growth cannot be sustained without a 
structural transformation that lifts workers from low-productivity agriculture 
and the informal sector to higher-productivity activities. This transformation 
has yet to take place in Sub-Saharan Africa. The booming price of commodi-
ties (oil, cotton, metals, minerals, and others) that Sub-Saharan Africa mostly 
exports fueled a large part of the past decade’s growth. Investment remains low 
in Africa—less than 15 percent of gross domestic product, compared with 25 
percent in Asia—and more than 80 percent of workers are stranded in low-
productivity jobs. 
Labor-intensive light manufacturing led the economic transformation of 
many of the most successful developing countries, but it has not fared well 
in Sub-Saharan Africa. While China’s emergence in the global manufacturing 
market since 1980 has resulted in a broad decline in the market share of all 
regions, the decline in Sub-Saharan Africa’s share has been longer and deeper 
than most. Sub-Saharan Africa’s share of global light manufacturing has con-
tinually declined—to less than 1 percent—and preferential access to U.S. and 
European Union (EU) markets has made little difference. Indeed, without 
Light Manufacturing in Africa: 
Targeted Policies to Enhance 
Private Investment and Create Jobs
=== PAGE 22 ===
2 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
structural transformation, Sub-Saharan Africa is unlikely to catch up with more 
prosperous countries like China and Vietnam, which were not very different 
from Sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s. 
In addition to increasing the productivity of medium and large formal ﬁ rms, 
Sub-Saharan Africa has to raise the productivity and encourage the upgrading 
and expansion of small enterprises, mostly in the informal sector. Light manu-
facturing in Sub-Saharan Africa is characterized by a few medium-size formal 
ﬁ rms providing products to niche or protected markets and by a vast number 
of small, low-productivity informal ﬁ rms providing low-quality products to the 
domestic market. These enterprises provide low-paying jobs, little in foreign 
exchange earnings, and few productive employment opportunities for young 
Africans. Encouraging the productivity and expansion of small ﬁ rms has not 
received adequate attention and will be addressed in this report.
This study draws on the following ﬁ ve analytical tools: 
• New research based on the World Bank Enterprise Surveys 
• Qualitative interviews with about 300 enterprises (both formal and infor-
mal) of all sizes in China, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Vietnam, and Zambia, con-
ducted by the study team and based on a questionnaire designed by Profes-
sor John Sutton of the London School of Economics
• Quantitative interviews with about 1,400 enterprises (both formal and 
informal) of all sizes in the ﬁ ve countries listed above, conducted by the 
Centre for the Study of African Economies at Oxford University and based 
on a questionnaire designed by Professor Marcel Fafchamps and Dr. Simon 
Quinn of Oxford University 
• Comparative value chain and feasibility analysis based on in-depth inter-
views of about 300 formal medium enterprises in the same ﬁ ve countries, 
conducted by the consulting ﬁ rm Global Development Solutions, Inc. 
• A study of the impact of Kaizen managerial training for owners of small and 
medium enterprises. This training, delivered to about 250 entrepreneurs in 
Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Vietnam, was led by Japanese researchers from the 
Foundation for Advanced Studies on International Development and the 
National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies. 
A discussion of why we chose these countries and these analytical tools is 
presented in this report. Detailed results can be found online at http://econ.
worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. 
This study has ﬁ ve features that distinguish it from previous studies. First, 
the detailed studies on light manufacturing at the subsector and product levels 
in ﬁ ve countries provide in-depth cost comparisons between Asia and Africa. 
Second, building on a growing body of work, the report uses a wide array of 
quantitative and qualitative techniques, including quantitative surveys and
=== PAGE 23 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
3
value chain analysis, to identify key constraints to enterprises and to evaluate 
differences in ﬁ rm performance across countries. Third, the ﬁ ndings that ﬁ rm 
constraints vary by country, sector, and ﬁ rm size led us to adopt a targeted 
approach to identifying constraints and combining market-based measures 
and selected government interventions to remove them. Fourth, the solution 
to light manufacturing problems cuts across many sectors and does not lie only 
in manufacturing alone. Solving the problem of manufacturing inputs requires 
solving speciﬁ c issues in agriculture, education, and infrastructure. Fifth, the 
report draws on experiences and solutions from other developing countries 
to inform its recommendations. The report’s goal is to ﬁ nd practical ways to 
increase employment and spur job creation in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Potential for Light Manufacturing: Creating Millions 
of Productive Jobs 
Using new evidence, this report shows that feasible, low-cost, sharply focused 
policy initiatives aimed at enhancing private investment could launch Sub-
Saharan Africa on a path to becoming competitive in light manufacturing. 
These initiatives would complement progress on broader investment reforms 
and could increase the share of industry in regional output and raise the market 
share of domestically produced goods in rapidly growing local markets for light 
manufactures. And as local producers increase the scale of their operations, 
improve the quality of their products, and accumulate experience with technol-
ogy, management, and marketing, they can take advantage of emerging export 
opportunities. In Sub-Saharan Africa, as in China and Vietnam (which also 
experienced accelerated growth), policies that encourage foreign direct invest-
ment can speed industrial development and export expansion. The impact of 
isolated successes can be multiplied, as demonstrated by Ethiopia’s recent foray 
into selling cut ﬂ owers in EU markets: a single pioneering ﬁ rm opened the door 
to an industry that now employs 50,000 workers. The strategies proposed here 
could initiate a process with the potential to create millions of productive jobs. 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s potential competitiveness in light manufacturing is 
based on two advantages. The ﬁ rst is a labor cost advantage. In Ethiopia, for 
example, labor productivity in some well-managed ﬁ rms can approach levels 
in China and Vietnam. At the same time, Ethiopia’s wages are only a quarter of 
China’s and a half of Vietnam’s, and its overall labor costs are lower still. Sub-
Saharan Africa’s second advantage is an abundance of natural resources that 
supply raw materials such as skins for the footwear industry, hard and soft tim-
ber for the furniture industry, and land for the agribusiness industry. Institu-
tional obstacles and unsuitable policies, however, have prevented local produc-
ers from taking advantage of certain resources. Timber costs are far higher in
=== PAGE 24 ===
4 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Ethiopia than in China or Vietnam, leading Ethiopia to import Asian furniture 
despite Ethiopia’s enormous unexploited potential to supply domestic timber, 
especially bamboo. This report envisions reforms that can unlock the potential 
of domestic resources like leather and bamboo to make a growing range of light 
manufactures competitive in the domestic market and, eventually, in global 
markets for labor-intensive products.  
Is there room for Sub-Saharan Africa in the global market today? Yes, if 
Africa can exploit its opportunities soon. China dominates the global export 
market in light manufactures, and its competitive edge far exceeds that of low-
income exporters that recently entered the global market. But the steeply rising 
costs of land, regulatory compliance, and especially labor (including both wages 
and beneﬁ ts) in China’s coastal export manufacturing centers have begun to 
erode these centers’ cost advantage. This erosion will continue and probably 
accelerate in the coming years. New entrants have already begun to line up: Ban-
gladesh, Cambodia, and China’s interior provinces. The ongoing redistribution 
of cost advantages in labor-intensive manufacturing presents an opportunity 
for Sub-Saharan Africa to start producing many light manufactures, enhance 
private investment, and create millions of productive jobs.
Fortunately, the current global trading environment favors Sub-Saharan 
Africa if it can overcome key constraints in the most promising subsectors. 
Along with low labor costs and abundant resources, Sub-Saharan Africa enjoys 
duty-free and quota-free access to U.S. and EU markets for light manufactures 
under the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act and the Cotonou Agreement. 
Are these advantages enough to offset Sub-Saharan Africa’s generally low 
labor productivity relative to that of its Asian competitors? Yes, if appropri-
ate supportive policies are implemented. This report draws inspiration from 
Asia, which demonstrates the enduring beneﬁ ts of adopting policies early that 
facilitate competitive output and input markets; attract foreign direct invest-
ment to capitalize on the region’s comparative advantage in low-wage labor; 
and provide technological, commercial, and managerial expertise. Like Asia, 
Sub-Saharan Africa could beneﬁ t from applying policies that accord free access 
to domestic and international markets for the inputs and outputs associated 
with light manufacturing and create conditions conducive to attracting foreign 
direct investment. 
Case Study: Ethiopia
Using the ﬁ ve analytical tools described above and data from three African and 
two Asian countries, this study conﬁ rms that select African countries have the 
potential for light manufacturing. To realize this potential, these countries must 
overcome constraints that vary by country, subsector, and ﬁ rm size.
=== PAGE 25 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
5
Previous studies identiﬁ ed constraints in a long list of cross-cutting issues, 
including corruption, red tape, inadequate utilities, poor transport, poor skills, 
poor access to ﬁ nance, and so on. In contrast, our detailed analysis points to 
a smaller, more speciﬁ c, and sometimes new set of key constraints. Narrowing 
the analysis can make the reform agenda more manageable within the ﬁ nancial 
and human resource constraints of most African countries. The report presents 
an in-depth diagnosis of the constraints in ﬁ ve light manufacturing subsectors 
in Ethiopia: apparel, leather products, agribusiness, wood products, and metal 
products. We propose policy reforms to address these constraints based on the 
successes of other countries. 
Ethiopia navigated the global economic crisis in 2008–09 better than many 
developing countries, encountering only modest declines in exports, remit-
tances, and foreign investments, which have since recovered beyond their pre-
crisis levels. Growth in exports and earnings, in conjunction with a relative 
slowdown in imports, has enabled foreign exchange reserves to rise. Overall 
inﬂ ation has dropped to single digits, mainly due to declining food prices, and 
growth has remained strong at about 8 to 9 percent a year since 2009. The 
Ethiopian government is committed to achieving continued growth within a 
stable macroeconomic framework in the context of the new ﬁ ve-year develop-
ment plan (Growth and Transformation Plan 2010/11–2014/15, Ministry of 
Finance and Economic Development 2010). The plan’s strategic pillars include 
sustaining rapid economic growth by promoting industrialization, enhancing 
social development, investing in agriculture and infrastructure, and strengthen-
ing governance and the role of youth and women.
Although each country’s economy is unique—and several aspects of Ethio-
pia’s governance, institutions, and political environment set it apart—there are 
enough common factors to make Ethiopia a good exemplar for a large group 
of Sub-Saharan African countries. Ethiopia has many natural resources that 
can provide valuable inputs for light manufacturing industries serving both 
domestic and export markets. Among its abundant resources are cattle, which 
can be processed into leather and its products; forests, which can be managed 
for the furniture industry; cotton, which can support the garments industry; 
and agricultural land and lakes, which can provide inputs for agroprocessing 
industries. Ethiopia has abundant low-cost labor, which gives it a comparative 
advantage in less-skilled, labor-intensive sectors such as light manufacturing. 
Ethiopia also shares several negative factors with other low-wage African coun-
tries, such as shortages of industrial land, poor trade logistics (particularly in 
landlocked countries), and limited access to ﬁ nance.   
This report does not claim that its Ethiopia-speciﬁ c ﬁ ndings apply to all 
Sub-Saharan African countries, although, as discussed in part II, there are some 
commonalities among the three Sub-Saharan African countries studied in this 
report. Nevertheless the analytical approach applied to Ethiopia can be replicated
=== PAGE 26 ===
6 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
in other African countries to derive speciﬁ c diagnoses and propose solutions 
tailored to country circumstances. Detailed policy recommendations for Tan-
zania and Zambia will be available shortly. Replicating this study’s methodology 
beyond our countries of focus will enable a rich analysis of the constraints to light 
manufacturing in other Sub-Saharan African countries and provide concrete 
policy recommendations to facilitate the growth of this sector across the region. 
Apparel: Poor Trade Logistics
Given the ready availability of the technology and skills required to manufac-
ture garments, there is obvious potential for domestic ﬁ rms to increase their 
share in the domestic and global clothing markets. A signiﬁ cant and growing 
labor cost advantage, access to a state-of-the-art and well-located container port 
in Djibouti, and duty-free access to the U.S. and EU markets offer Ethiopia the 
opportunity to expand its apparel industry. Foreign direct investment can accel-
erate the process of ramping up production and exports. Ethiopia’s potential for 
expanding its production of high-quality cotton enhances the potential beneﬁ ts 
associated with expanded production of clothing. The binding constraint on 
Ethiopia’s competitiveness in apparel has been poor trade logistics, which wipe 
out its labor cost advantage and cut it off from the higher-value, time-sensitive 
segments of the market.
Establishing a green channel for apparel at customs, providing free and 
immediate access to foreign exchange, reducing the cost of letters of credit, and 
setting up an industrial zone close to Djibouti would resolve the most important 
trade logistics issues. As in China and Vietnam, these reforms would position 
Ethiopia to attract outside investors to lead the industry. Competitiveness could 
be reinforced by developing a competitive textiles industry (Ethiopia produces 
high-quality cotton and has cheap hydro-energy). While Ethiopia’s apparel sec-
tor currently generates only US$8 million in exports and 9,000 jobs, Vietnam 
has—with policies similar to those recommended in this report—achieved 
US$8 billion in exports and created 1 million productive jobs.
Leather Products: Input Shortages
Ethiopia has even greater potential in leather, which is more labor intensive 
than apparel. Italian shoe importers express the highest regard for Ethiopian 
leather. Modest, targeted reforms could enable Ethiopia’s large animal herds to 
produce vast amounts of some of the best leather in the world. Furthermore, 
the penalty of poor trade logistics is less serious because leather products are 
less time sensitive than apparel. The immediate constraint is limited access to 
high-quality processed leather. 
Enabling imports of high-quality processed leather would easily and imme-
diately solve the acute shortage of leather in the industry. Removing restrictions
=== PAGE 27 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
7
on the exports of leather would increase incentives to invest in the Ethiopian 
leather supply chain. The challenge is to expand the commercial production 
and sale of high-quality animal hides. Facilitating access to rural land for good- 
practice animal farms (already written into Ethiopia’s current development 
plan) will open the door to large-scale commercial herding enterprises. Pro-
moting better breeds, controlling cattle diseases, and enabling the use of cattle 
as collateral would expand the capacity of small-scale operators to contribute to 
a larger supply of quality hides. Ectoparasites—a disease that affects Ethiopian 
hides—can be controlled by a modest program costing less than US$10 million 
a year. And improving trade logistics along the same lines as apparel would 
further enhance competitiveness. Vietnam—with a population similar to that 
of Ethiopia—created 600,000 productive jobs in the leather products sector by 
implementing policies similar to those recommended in this report. 
Agribusiness: High Input Prices
As exempliﬁ ed by the success of coffee and cut ﬂ owers, the potential for agri-
business lies in low wages, varied soil and climatic conditions, opportunities to 
increase yields on cultivated land, and large tracts of unused arable land. Ethio-
pia has the second largest dairy cattle population in Sub-Saharan Africa, behind 
Sudan and followed by Tanzania. As in other sectors, problems lie in the market 
for inputs (in agriculture), where distortions lead to low productivity and high 
prices. Fixed prices for several food items discourage farmers from increasing 
productivity. Issues in the seed and fertilizer markets also contribute to very low 
agricultural productivity—yield rates for wheat are generally less than 1 ton per 
hectare. Investor access to rural land is also difﬁ cult because of the conﬂ uence 
of traditional rights with state ownership of land. And neither agricultural land 
nor cattle can be used as collateral for loans.
To unleash the vast potential of agribusiness, the government should facil-
itate private sector investments in key input markets, such as fertilizers and 
hybrid seeds, and extend rural food safety nets to vulnerable urban dwellers as 
an alternative to price caps and export bans. In recent years, the government has 
encouraged these investments, and this trend should continue. The government 
is also advised to pilot in key locations the use of land and cattle as collateral and 
facilitate access to rural land for good-practice investors.
Wood and Metal Products: Land and Finance
Firms in the wood and metal products subsectors rely on expensive imports 
of wood and steel. Ethiopia has the natural resources to develop a competitive 
supply of wood, but its current supply is unreliable, unsustainable, and poorly 
organized. Even in the better-managed wood product ﬁ rms, labor productivity 
is low—a worker produces 4.5 chairs a day in China and 1.9 in Vietnam, but
=== PAGE 28 ===
8 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
only 0.3 in Ethiopia. Ethiopia’s steel subsector is also constrained. The price of 
steel is 30 percent higher in Ethiopia than in China due to poor trade logistics 
and high import tariffs.
The potential lies not in exports (at least initially) but in the growing domes-
tic market and in the high weight-to-value ratio of ﬁ nished wood and metal 
imports. The sector is dominated by smaller, mostly informal, ﬁ rms with no 
large or exporting ﬁ rms. For wood the government should facilitate access to 
rural land and ﬁ nancing for private wood plantations. For metals the cost of 
inputs could be reduced by cutting the 10 percent import tariff on steel and 
exploiting Ethiopia’s proven reserves of iron ore. For both subsectors the govern-
ment could support the most deserving enterprises by facilitating their access 
to skills, ﬁ nance, and industrial land as part of “plug-and-play” industrial parks. 
The Five Subsectors
In sum, although labor productivity is high among the few larger ﬁ rms in four 
of the ﬁ ve subsectors, it remains low on average, especially for smaller ﬁ rms that 
lack entrepreneurial, managerial, and technical skills. Access to industrial land 
and formal ﬁ nance are also constraints in each of the subsectors. Smaller ﬁ rms 
are constrained because the government gave larger exporters in certain sectors 
(including apparel and leather) preferred access to land and ﬁ nance. Banks do 
not accept machinery or cattle as collateral, and restrictions on buying and 
selling make land difﬁ cult to use as collateral. Without easy access to land and 
ﬁ nance, small ﬁ rms remain small, low in productivity, and unable to upgrade 
technology or expand production. 
Input policy issues are the most signiﬁ cant constraints (table 1). This ﬁ nding 
is important because issues related to input industries tend to be overlooked in 
the reform agenda for light manufacturing. Indeed, Ethiopia (like many other 
African countries) should reform the many input industries where it has a com-
parative advantage—leather, wood, many agricultural products, and possibly 
apparel and steel—thanks to abundant natural resources, a favorable climate, 
and the potential for cheap hydro-energy. 
Detailed policy recommendations, including the time frame for implemen-
tation, are presented in table 2. Many of these recommendations, consistent 
with the traditional agenda for investment climate reform, seek to promote 
competition and reduce transaction costs (such as improved trade logistics and 
lower import tariffs). In this case, however, the detailed subsector diagnostics 
and the cross-country comparisons reduce the number of policy recommen-
dations and make them more speciﬁ c. More importantly, the beneﬁ ts of policy 
reforms are easy to identify. Some new critical issues have also emerged, such 
as the need to develop wood plantations. Even implementation of the “tradi-
tional” investment climate reforms can be dramatically improved by focusing,
=== PAGE 29 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
9
at least initially, on the subsectors where they will yield the most beneﬁ ts (such 
as trade logistics for apparel and leather products) and for which the country 
has a comparative advantage. 
Implementing this policy agenda will require coordination across various 
government departments and agencies and a clear understanding of the objec-
tive of promoting the competitiveness of light industry manufacturers in the 
domestic and global markets. Before they commit resources, domestic and for-
eign investors need to see credible commitments from government pledging 
to complete the reform agenda. High-level support is a crucial ingredient in 
execution of the report’s recommendations. We suggest that the Ethiopian gov-
ernment put in place a dedicated high-level team to develop and implement the 
proposed reform program. 
The priorities and sequencing of policy reforms and interventions should 
adhere to three criteria. First, these measures should focus on sectors and sub-
sectors demonstrating the most potential for comparative advantage and job 
growth. Second, measures should be the most cost-effective in the short and 
long runs, with the least ﬁ scal impact. Third, implementation capacity and 
implications for governance and the political economy of policy reforms should 
be thoroughly assessed and used as a guide. 
The report highlights the importance of industry-speciﬁ c issues (such as the 
effects of cattle disease on leather, import tariffs on steel, and price caps on agri-
cultural products) in addition to economywide issues (such as poor access to 
industrial land, lack of technical skills, and poor trade logistics). This raises the 
Table 1 Constraints in Ethiopia, by Importance, Size of Firm, and Sector
Input
industries
Land
Finance
Entrepre-
neurial
skills 
Worker 
skills
Trade 
logistics
Apparel
Smaller
Important
Critical
Critical
Important
Important
Large
Important
Important
Critical
Leather products
Smaller
Critical
Critical
Critical
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Wood products
Smaller
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Metal products
Smaller
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Agribusiness
Smaller
Critical
Critical
Critical
Important
Large
Critical
Critical
Important
Source: Authors.
Note: Blank cells are not a priority.
=== PAGE 30 ===
10 
 
Table 2 Proposed Policy Measures in Ethiopia
Sector
Short term (6–12 months)
Medium term (1–2 years)
Long term (2–5 years)
All sectors
(a) Remove import tariffs on all inputs for 
light manufacturing, including those that are 
destined for national and regional markets; 
(b) offer incentives for banks and other ﬁ nan-
cial institutions to offer ﬁ nancing for machin-
ery to well-managed ﬁ rms
(a) Develop collateral markets to improve access 
to ﬁ nance; for example, facilitate the use of 
machines, livestock, and land as collateral; (b) sup-
port programs such as Kaizen’s managerial train-
ing on marketing and business strategy, produc-
tion and quality management, and business record 
keeping; (c) improve the performance of trade 
between Addis Ababa and Djibouti, investigate 
and address issues relating to letters of credit, fuel 
costs, and competition among trucking companies; 
(d) harmonize and improve customs procedures by 
simplifying procedures and leveraging information 
technology
(a) Develop “plug-and-play” industrial zones 
to facilitate access to industrial land and basic 
infrastructure; consider setting up zones next 
to Djibouti; (b) develop the hard infrastructure 
(across boundaries) to support multimodal 
systems, which would entail rehabilitating the 
railway line between Addis Ababa and Djibouti 
(planned); (c) develop strategic partnerships 
along key trade corridors, including with Dji-
bouti, to optimize port operations and minimize 
charges; (d) in partnership with the private 
sector, design technical skills development pro-
grams such as those at the Penang Skills Devel-
opment Centre (Malaysia) that offer a variety of 
sector-speciﬁ c short- and long-term certiﬁ cate, 
diploma, and degree courses
Apparel
(a) Remove restrictions on exports of cotton; 
(b) guarantee the immediate availability of 
foreign exchange for apparel producers; 
(c) eliminate foreign exchange fee; (d) estab-
lish a green channel for apparel at customs; 
(e) negotiate lower handling fees with Djibouti
See the proposals for all sectors
See the proposals for all sectors
Leather products
(a) Remove restrictions on exports of leather 
and facilitate the import of high-quality pro-
cessed leather; (b) guarantee the immediate 
availability of foreign exchange for leather 
producers; (c) eliminate foreign exchange fee; 
(d) establish a green channel for leather at 
customs; (e) negotiate lower handling fees 
with Djibouti
(a) Control cattle disease; (b) facilitate access to 
rural land for strategic investors in cattle through 
an inclusive and transparent process
Promote cross-breeding of cows
=== PAGE 31 ===
 
 
11
Wood products
Reduce taxes on legal wood
(a) Facilitate access to land and ﬁ nancing for sus-
tainable private wood plantations of fast-growing 
species on degraded land close to the main urban 
centers; (b) facilitate access to rural land for stra-
tegic investors in wood plantations through an 
inclusive and transparent process
(a) Fight illegal logging; (b) enable carbon 
ﬁ nancing
Metallic products
See the proposals for all sectors
(a) Promote the exploitation of iron ore deposits; 
(b)  conduct a feasibility study to assess the com-
petitiveness of a domestic steel industry
See the proposals for all sectors
Agricultural products
Remove price controls on agricultural products
(a) Facilitate private sector investments in key 
input markets such as hybrid seeds and fertil-
izers (for example, by easing access to foreign 
exchange); (b) facilitate access to rural land for 
strategic investors in agricultural plantations 
through an inclusive and transparent process; 
(c) provide technical assistance to smallholders 
to connect with strategic investors
Promote cross-breeding of cows
Source: Authors.
Note: Proposals would benefit both small and large firms, with the exception of the promotion of iron ore deposits, which would only benefit large firms.
=== PAGE 32 ===
12 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
issue of how to prioritize and package policy reforms within and across sectors 
given that the government cannot tackle all issues at once. Speciﬁ c reforms and 
economywide reforms need not be mutually exclusive. They can be comple-
mentary, and both are needed to move the economy forward. Priorities should 
be determined by cost-beneﬁ t analysis. Where hard choices are required, the 
government should give priority to the locations and industries with the great-
est potential, taking into account the political cost of reforms. This approach 
would also help to expand the reforms through demonstration effects. China 
adopted this approach with land reforms (initiated in the Shenzhen Special 
Economic Zone), and Mauritius adopted it with labor reforms (ﬁ rst limited 
to exporters). Of course, such deliberately targeted reforms may be prone to 
mistakes and capture—hence the importance of a transparent and professional 
process to implement reforms and the political courage to correct mistakes.
African Competitiveness in Light Manufacturing and 
Possible Solutions from Asia
Although the speciﬁ c nature and relative importance of the binding constraints 
and policy responses will vary by country, subsector, and ﬁ rm size, the analysis 
in Tanzania and Zambia conﬁ rmed that most of the main constraints fall into 
the same six categories as in Ethiopia: input industries, trade logistics, access 
to ﬁ nance, access to industrial land, worker skills, and entrepreneurial skills. 
Detailed policy recommendations on Tanzania and Zambia will be presented 
in an upcoming report.  
To address the issues identiﬁ ed above, other successful developing countries 
have implemented several practical solutions, explored below. 
Plug-and-Play Industrial Parks
In developing plug-and-play industrial parks, China gradually learned to 
address multiple constraints. Beginning in the late 1970s, special economic 
zones provided mostly foreign-owned ﬁ rms with access to industrial land, 
port facilities, standardized factory shell buildings, worker housing, and duty-
free import of materials and equipment for export production. Initial success 
encouraged the proliferation of industrial parks for domestic ﬁ rms serving both 
home and overseas markets. Zone operations subsequently expanded to include 
training facilities and one-stop shops for business regulations. These initiatives 
considerably reduced ﬁ nancing costs and risks for the better-managed small 
ﬁ rms, allowing them to grow into medium enterprises despite their inability to 
obtain bank loans. This is how China avoided the “missing middle” problem, 
where the size distribution of ﬁ rms is characterized by either very small or very
=== PAGE 33 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
13
large ﬁ rms. The parks also contributed to the development of industrial clus-
ters by making it easier for smaller ﬁ rms to locate near larger ﬁ rms, generating 
economies of scale and scope for Chinese industries. And housing workers next 
to plants reduced the labor costs for plant operators as well as the cost of living 
for workers.
Proximity ﬁ rst to Hong Kong SAR, China, and later to domestic ports that 
gradually developed into world-class cargo facilities, enabled China’s special 
economic zones to help resolve trade logistics issues. Establishing the Shenzhen 
Special Economic Zone next to Hong Kong SAR, China, transformed a ﬁ shing 
village into a leading light manufacturing city of 8 million people in less than 
30 years. The parks also served as the testing ground for difﬁ cult reforms: Shen-
zhen led China’s adoption of a market-friendly land-lease system and many 
other new institutional and regulatory arrangements.
The key to success is intense competition and cooperation among ﬁ rms 
inside and outside the parks. Most parks did not preselect speciﬁ c light indus-
tries, instead letting market forces drive the formation of specialized clusters. 
The parks, including the factory shells and housing, are ﬁ nanced by local gov-
ernments as well as the private sector. The local governments’ share is often 
ﬁ nanced by bank loans (with the zone’s real estate as collateral), repaid with 
the additional tax revenues from increased economic activity. To be successful, 
parks must be part of a package of interventions that address the most binding 
constraints limiting production and trade.
Key Input Industries
China and Vietnam reformed and supported key input industries so they could 
become competitive. Nationally, both China and Vietnam encouraged foreign 
direct investment for key inputs (as in machine manufacturers) and developed 
sustainably managed wood plantations and competitive agricultural sectors. 
They supported input and output markets through the provision of land and 
ﬁ nancing, as with the local government-managed Yiwu market in China, now 
the largest commodity market in the world. China and Vietnam also provided 
support and coordination along the value chains, while gradually reducing 
the trade restrictions protecting domestic input industries. In addition, China 
exempted export producers in special economic zones from paying taxes and 
duties on imported inputs; offered tax rebates to exporters outside the special 
economic zones; and gradually developed programs to provide information 
and technical assistance on inputs, technology, and suppliers to small and 
medium enterprises. The report shows that removing Ethiopia’s import duty 
on inputs in the light manufacturing sector would cost no more than 2 percent 
of total tax revenue, which could easily be recouped by imposing an excise tax, 
if needed.
=== PAGE 34 ===
14 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Trade Logistics
Both China and Vietnam relied on good trade logistics at the outset of their 
light manufacturing journey by creating manufacturing zones close to ports 
and then exempting ﬁ rms in those zones from numerous domestic regulations 
and tariffs and import restrictions. This approach enabled China and Vietnam 
to import efﬁ ciently the inputs that domestic ﬁ rms could not produce or supply 
competitively, allowing ﬁ rms based in the new zones to gain access to export 
markets cheaply and quickly. Locating industrial zones next to world-class ports 
with efﬁ cient customs also made a difference, as shown in Shenzhen.
Emulating China and Vietnam will not be enough for Sub-Saharan Africa, 
especially in the many countries without direct access to a world-class port. 
African governments need to work together to pursue regional integration by 
improving trade logistics along key business corridors, especially governance 
and regulation at ports. To improve connectivity and increase competition, 
African countries should continue to develop the hard infrastructure to sup-
port multimodal systems combining trucking, railways, airways, and shipping. 
To harmonize and improve customs, countries should simplify procedures 
and leverage information and technology. And to increase competition among 
freight forwarders and shipping and trucking companies, countries should 
remove price controls and restrictions on foreign direct investment. 
First Movers
Entrants in new industries typically face high costs and risks. This is especially 
true in Sub-Saharan Africa, where industrial structure and infrastructure are 
limited and regulatory and governance risks are high. But the prospect of single 
entrants serving as catalysts for the rise of competitive new industries is real, 
as illustrated by Ethiopia’s rose industry, which began with a single ﬁ rm and 
quickly grew to more than a dozen ﬁ rms with direct employment exceeding 
50,000 workers (plus further job creation among suppliers of transport, pack-
aging materials, and so on). The rise of Ethiopia’s rose industry began after the 
government facilitated land access for the ﬁ rst rose plantation, demonstrating 
the potential beneﬁ ts of undertaking a limited, sharply focused policy interven-
tion on behalf of promising start-ups. 
In China initial efforts to promote the expansion of low-wage, labor- intensive 
production have given way to programs offering support to start-ups in more 
complex sectors, often involving skilled labor and high technology. Support 
may begin before ﬁ rms move into the industrial zones, with site selection pro-
posals, project reviews, and licenses for land use and construction. After moving 
in, ﬁ rms may obtain technical assistance, technological upgrading, and access 
to market information through networking to guide the ﬁ rm and the industry 
to become nationally competitive. Support to ﬁ rst movers can be provided on 
a one-time basis (to avoid rent seeking) and does not have to be expensive.
=== PAGE 35 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
15
Governments can provide a matching-grant scheme to share the high risks of 
ﬁ rst movers, such as paying for part of a feasibility study. Government support 
does not need to target large foreign ﬁ rms. Ofﬁ cial efforts to disseminate basic 
knowledge about markets and suppliers alone may unleash new industries, as 
with Zambia’s corrugated tin roof industry. Support to ﬁ rst movers should be 
open, transparent, and consistent, and all candidates should have access to the 
same beneﬁ ts and information.
Entrepreneurial Skills
Our quantitative survey shows that entrepreneurs who receive technical assis-
tance at start-up can deliver signiﬁ cantly better business outcomes. Ethiopia’s 
Ramsay Shoe Factory shows the importance of technical assistance in raising 
the quantity and quality of output. Africa’s multitude of small informal ﬁ rms 
includes many operators with substantial entrepreneurial talent. The Kaizen 
study shows that lack of basic management skills limits the capacity of small 
ﬁ rms to accumulate assets and expand (Sonobe, Suzuki, and Otsuka 2011). It 
also shows that, as in the case of Ramsay, access to modest and inexpensive train-
ing or technical support can open the door for some informal ﬁ rms to pros-
per and expand into substantial generators of employment and, in some cases, 
exports. African governments should seek opportunities to invest in programs 
that can improve managerial and technical skills, especially among small-scale 
operators already working in high-potential subsectors. Governments should 
also help domestic ﬁ rms to adopt and adapt existing technologies by providing 
targeted technical support and advice to owners and entrepreneurs. This support 
should encompass not only informal ﬁ rms, but formal, large enterprises as well. 
One way to help entrepreneurs is through Kaizen’s managerial training in 
three modules: marketing and business strategy, production and quality man-
agement (including a brief introduction to workplace housekeeping techniques 
and other Kaizen activities), and business record keeping. Even a three-week 
training program can improve entrepreneurs’ management practices and sub-
stantially increase their willingness to pay for the program. Foreign direct invest-
ment offers another way to expand the domestic stock of entrepreneurial skills. 
In China ﬁ rms ﬁ rst beneﬁ ted from the knowledge provided by overseas Chinese 
entrepreneurs and foreign managers at multinational branch plants. Firms then 
beneﬁ ted from the transfer of know-how associated with foreign direct invest-
ment, which contributed to a new generation of domestic entrepreneurs.
Vocational Training to Improve Workers’ Skills
Even with its low-skill workforce, Sub-Saharan Africa could become competi-
tive in some light manufacturing sectors. In the apparel sector, for example, 
small numbers of managers and technicians can guide hundreds of work-
ers. Specialists report that inexperienced workers can learn to operate sewing
=== PAGE 36 ===
16 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
machines in no more than two weeks. For the longer term, upgrading to more 
complex production will require a better-trained workforce than is currently 
available. But the expansion of light industry need not await higher school 
enrollment and better-quality schooling. Industrialization can begin rapidly 
by targeting promising sectors with modest skill requirements—the objective 
of this report—and then adopting policy measures that contribute to lowering 
the training costs facing would-be private investors. Together with the private 
sector, governments can offer technical assistance to foster industry-speciﬁ c 
vocational training for less-skilled workers. Such training could be offered to 
smaller ﬁ rms in industrial clusters (including informal ones) and to larger 
ﬁ rms in industrial parks. 
Governments, in partnership with the private sector, can leverage publicly 
funded programs to turn out technicians who can operate or repair simple 
machines, read instructions, and use the Internet to communicate and search 
for information. In addition to good basic education, governments could design 
technical skills development programs such as those at the Penang Skills Devel-
opment Centre (Malaysia), which offers a variety of sector-speciﬁ c short- and 
long-term certiﬁ cate, diploma, and degree courses for all levels of the workforce. 
Dedicated skills development schools have had huge payoffs in countries where 
they were directed at sectors in which the country had a latent comparative 
advantage.
Implementation Issues 
The report emphasizes how important it is for African governments to focus 
their scarce resources on resolving the most signiﬁ cant constraints on light 
manufacturing industries with the biggest potential. Reform implementation 
should take into account ﬁ ve considerations: 
• First, policy interventions should begin with pilot initiatives and be continu-
ally revised and updated. As the Chinese reform experience shows, where 
policy reforms are needed, pilot initiatives can be designed in selected rural, 
geographically isolated areas to ensure that lessons are learned before scaling 
up (Zhang, de Haan, and Fan 2010). Implementation should be decentral-
ized as much as possible to increase proximity to the private sector, improve 
accountability, and foster competition between local governments. 
• Second, not all efforts to support selected industries will succeed. The Asian 
experience shows that governments should be willing to drop failing policies. 
For this reason it is important to keep pilot initiatives small and put in place 
effective monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to review and improve 
ongoing interventions regularly.
• Third, the fundamental role of the government in private sector develop-
ment is to foster competition. Ongoing patterns of development in light
=== PAGE 37 ===
OVERVIEW 
 
17
manufacturing in China and Vietnam show that competition is the most 
critical aspect of industrial development. In both countries, initial preference 
for state-run enterprises has given way to national policies that facilitate the 
growth of light manufacturing industries through open competition. 
• Fourth, it is important for African governments to mobilize support from all 
partners—the private sector, nongovernmental organizations, and the donor 
community—in their structural transformation efforts. 
• Fifth, one of the best ways for the government to facilitate robust private 
sector growth is to maintain a stable and conducive macroeconomic envi-
ronment and ensure that natural resources are well managed. Most African 
countries have made substantial progress in this area in recent years, and 
these efforts should continue.  
The ﬁ scal impact and political economy of light manufacturing policy 
reforms should be assessed before implementation begins. It is often said that 
limited capacity and weak governance make it difﬁ cult for many Sub-Saharan 
African countries to design and implement the speciﬁ c policies proposed here. 
But the proposed approach is not expected to create serious governance issues 
for four reasons: 
• First, although some of the proposed reforms would reduce the rent of vested 
interest groups, the extent of policy intervention is smaller than the tradi-
tional big-bang approach, and any political impact is likely to be smaller. The 
beneﬁ ts can be calculated up-front, and a deeper analysis of political econ-
omy issues can be conducted to reduce the losses of vested interest groups. 
• Second, the proposed policy reforms would be consistent with the latent 
comparative advantage of the economy. If subsidies and other supportive 
policies target industries consistent with latent comparative advantage, the 
required subsidies will be small but will attract many new entrants into a 
competitive sector, making rent seeking less likely. 
• Third, policy interventions should increase competition (for example, by 
reducing entry costs and risks) as well as the capacity of ﬁ rms to compete. 
This is the opposite of what past, failed industrial policies did in Africa, such 
as policies protecting and subsidizing a few companies in industries in which 
the country had no comparative advantage.
• Fourth, while the broader agenda of good governance is important, Afri-
can governments should not wait for improvements before supporting the 
private sector with focused policies to enhance investment and create more 
growth and more jobs. The East Asian experience shows that, with capable 
leadership that promotes development by encouraging private business and 
enabling market forces, a country can achieve impressive results even if the 
governance issues have not been addressed at all levels.
=== PAGE 38 ===
18 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
References
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 2010. Growth and Transformation Plan 
2010/11–2014/15 Volume 1: Main Text. Addis Ababa: Government of Ethiopia. http://
www.mofed.gov.et/English/Resources/Documents/GTP%20English2.pdf.
Sonobe, Tetsushi, Aya Suzuki, and Keijiro Otsuka. 2011. “Kaizen for Managerial Skills 
Improvement in Small and Medium Enterprises: An Impact Evaluation Study.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online as Volume IV 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2011. World Development Indicators 2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Zhang, Xiaobo, Arjan de Haan, and Shenggen Fan. 2010. “Policy Reforms as a Process 
of Learning.” In Narratives of Chinese Economic Reforms: How Does China Cross the 
River? ed. Xiaobo Zhang, Shenggen Fan, and Arjan de Haan. Hackensack, NJ: World 
Scientiﬁ c Publishing.
=== PAGE 39 ===
1
Setting the Stage
Part
=== PAGE 40 ===

=== PAGE 41 ===
Chapter 1
After stagnating for most of the past 45 years, economic performance in Sub-
Saharan Africa is markedly better, suggesting a turning point (Arbache, Go, 
and Page 2008). Between 2001 and 2010 gross domestic product (GDP) grew 
5.2 percent a year and per capita income grew 2 percent a year, up from –0.4 
percent in the previous 10 years and exceeding growth in both Latin America 
and the Caribbean and in high-income countries (World Economic Forum 
2011). The reforms of the 1990s, which focused on macroeconomic stability 
and liberalization, began to gain traction. After decades of relying mostly on 
donor ﬁ nance and its own resources, Sub-Saharan Africa found a spot in the 
global market for foreign direct investment (FDI). Between 2000 and 2009, net 
FDI ﬂ ows averaged about US$22 billion a year, more than ﬁ ve times the average 
of US$4 billion a year between 1990 and 1999 (UNCTAD 2011). And export 
growth was robust. These growth-related indicators suggest that Sub-Saharan 
Africa’s economies, typically perceived as the last stronghold of traditional agri-
culture and underdevelopment in a globalized world, have turned a corner. 
Structural Transformation
Sub-Saharan Africa’s recent growth would mark the start of a new development 
trajectory if the attendant structural transformation, another indicator of sus-
tainable growth, were equally visible. But it is not, as reﬂ ected in trade trends. 
The role of exports in the economy increased a little, to 32 percent during 
2000–09 relative to 27 percent in the previous decade, but export diversiﬁ cation 
remained elusive. While export growth accelerated in the last decade, 73 percent 
of it was attributable to mineral exports, which spiked in a commodity price 
boom. Africa’s share in the global economy also remained marginal. Between 
1980 and 2008 its share of global exports stagnated at 1.3–1.6 percent, while 
East Asia’s share increased from 3.3 to 14 percent (World Economic Forum 
2011). Nor did Sub-Saharan Africa’s investment growth, which should follow 
Good Possibilities for Light 
Manufacturing in Sub-Saharan Africa
=== PAGE 42 ===
22 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
a pickup in FDI, materialize.1 The macroeconomic reforms of the 1990s led to 
more sustainable ﬁ scal policies, controlled inﬂ ation, and better managed debt. 
Some countries went further and addressed fundamental structural rigidities 
by divesting public sector activities, opening some government monopolies, 
such as telecommunications, to private participation, and reducing public sec-
tor borrowing from domestic banks to expand opportunities for the ﬁ nancing 
of private investment. But a surge in private investment did not ensue. 
Without structural transformation, it is questionable whether Africa can cre-
ate the millions of higher-productivity jobs needed to lift workers out of agri-
culture and the informal sector. Structural transformation was the foundation 
of labor productivity growth and prosperity in Asia. Millions of better-paying 
jobs were created with the emergence of labor-intensive sectors where produc-
tivity was higher than in agriculture and the informal sector. 
A large, low-productivity agriculture sector that employs as much as 60 per-
cent of the labor force is typical for a Sub-Saharan African economy (UNCTAD 
2011). Including workers in the informal sector, close to 80 percent of all Sub-
Saharan African workers are in low-productivity, low-income jobs. In light of 
the negative association between employment in agriculture and income per 
capita (ﬁ gure 1.1), the only channel through which to create better-paying 
jobs is structural transformation to reallocate workers from low-productivity 
agriculture and the informal sector into more productive economic activity in 
Figure 1.1 Employment in Agriculture and Income in Select Countries, 2008
PHL
PAK
EGY
CHN 
TUR
PRY
POL
PER
KOR
SNG
ARG
LUX
0
7.5
9.5
11.5
10
–10
20
30
40
50
agricultural employment as % 
of total employment
log of GDP per capita, PPP
NTH
NOR
Source: World Bank 2010.
=== PAGE 43 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
23
manufacturing and services (McMillan and Rodrik 2011). Without this trans-
formation, Africa cannot redress the prevailing market dualism that separates 
the thousands of small, mostly informal ﬁ rms from the limited number of large, 
formal ﬁ rms. 
For the huge pool of workers in agriculture and the informal sector, labor-
intensive manufacturing that requires skills not too different from their current 
ones could be a source of more productive employment. Agricultural incomes 
are invariably low, whether in coffee-producing Tanzania and Uganda—where 
about 75 percent of workers are in agriculture and 10–15 percent are in house-
hold enterprises—or in cotton-producing Burkina Faso (nearly 85 and 10 per-
cent, respectively; Fox 2011). 
In addition to increasing the productivity of medium and large formal ﬁ rms, 
Sub-Saharan Africa can derive great beneﬁ t from systematic efforts to raise the 
productivity of small enterprises, mostly in the informal sector. Light manu-
facturing in Sub-Saharan Africa is characterized by a few formal medium-size 
ﬁ rms providing products to niche or protected markets and by a vast number 
of small, informal, low-productivity ﬁ rms providing low-quality products to 
the domestic market. These enterprises provide very low-paying jobs, little in 
foreign exchange earnings, and not much productive employment for aspiring 
young Africans.
The structure of most Sub-Saharan economies has not changed in the last 
half century. They continue to be dominated by agriculture (ﬁ gure 1.2) or 
mining. While labor productivity in mining is undoubtedly high, it has limited 
potential for employment. The large service sector in most African countries 
comprises predominantly nontradable services, such as retail trade, where labor 
productivity is also low. In recent years, tourism seems to be growing well in 
some countries, but other tradable services have yet to emerge. The conspicu-
ous absence of more productive, higher-wage employment options outside 
agriculture and the informal sector explains why, at the end of the ﬁ rst decade 
of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, incomes in Sub-Saharan Africa lag those of other 
developing countries by a considerable margin.2 Worldwide, the average labor 
productivity is only US$17,530 in agriculture but US$38,503 in manufacturing 
(US$2,000 purchasing power parity; McMillan and Rodrik 2011). 
Yet another metric of structural transformation is a shift in what Africa pro-
duces and exports to the rest of the world. The emergence of new sectors and 
scaling up of more productive ones should elevate a country’s position in the 
global market and should be measurable in a shift of its production or export 
basket from low-value primary products and services (such as household enter-
prises engaged in petty trading) toward higher value added ones. This process 
has been slow to occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. Despite having the most open 
economies, as shown in the high share of trade in GDP, Sub-Saharan Africa 
saw its participation in global manufacturing production and exports decline
=== PAGE 44 ===
24 
 
Figure 1.2  Economic Structure in Select Sub-Saharan African Countries, Various Years, 1960–2010
% of GDP
% of GDP
% of GDP
agriculture
industry
manufacturing
services
a. Mali
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1968
2007
b. Ghana
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1965
2010
c. Kenya
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1960
2010
g. Tanzania
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2000
2010
h. Zambia
1965
2010
i. Ethiopia
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1981
2010
d. Togo
1960
2005
e. Côte d’Ivoire
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1965
2010
f. Cameroon
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1965
2007
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Source: Monga 2011; World Development Indicators data, various years.
=== PAGE 45 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
25
between 1980 and 2005 (ﬁ gure 1.3). While the emergence of China in the global 
manufacturing market since 1980 has resulted in a broad decline in the share 
of all regions in this market, the decline of Sub-Saharan Africa’s share has been 
much longer and deeper. Sub-Saharan Africa’s share of global light manufactur-
ing has been continually declining—to less than 1 percent—and preferential 
access to the U.S. and European Union (EU) markets has made little difference. 
This signals the declining competitiveness of its manufacturing, an important 
route out of agriculture. 
Light Manufacturing, Including Agribusiness, as a Possible 
Driver of Africa’s Structural Transformation 
While light manufacturing3 is not the only alternative to low-productivity agri-
culture, it has been historically, and still is, an important source of growth and 
productive employment in economies abundantly endowed with less-skilled 
labor and a comparative advantage in labor-intensive sectors. In almost every 
country the transformation from traditional agriculture toward a modern 
economy began with light manufacturing—cotton and silk textiles in Japan; 
textiles, food processing, and a host of labor-intensive consumer products in 
Taiwan, China; and so on—because of its potential to absorb a large pool of 
less-skilled workers rapidly from agriculture into new occupations that substan-
tially increased their productivity without imposing steep capital requirements. 
Figure 1.3 Share of Sub-Saharan Africa in Global Production and Exports, 1980 and 2005
Africa’s share of world manufacturing
production and exports, %
production
exports
production
exports
1980
2005
0
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.75
1
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Source: Amoako 2011.
=== PAGE 46 ===
26 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
So, just as rising costs of labor and land diminished the comparative advantage 
of light industry in Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong SAR, China, during the 
1970s, opening the door to rapid expansion of China’s production of labor-
intensive export goods beginning in the 1980s, the rapid cost escalation now 
facing China’s export-oriented light manufacturing sector creates opportuni-
ties that could jump-start Sub-Saharan Africa’s structural transformation in 
the near future because it is well endowed with inexpensive, low-skilled labor, a 
key ingredient in the initial industrialization of a long list of Asian economies. 
For Ethiopia and many other nations of Sub-Saharan Africa, the light manu-
facturing sector offers an attractive choice for making optimal use of its abundant 
labor and natural resources to create better-paying jobs fairly rapidly for its vast 
pool of less-skilled labor in agriculture and the informal sector. This is also evi-
dent in East Asian and South Asian countries, where light industries continue to 
employ vast numbers of unskilled workers, especially in India (Panagariya 2008). 
Light manufacturing can be important even in countries with no clear com-
parative advantage in it. In such countries, while it may not be a viable export 
industry, light manufacturing could still replace imports and serve the domestic 
market. The overt dependence of many Sub-Saharan African countries on aid-
ﬁ nanced imports of light manufactures could be reduced by development of 
a light manufacturing sector that uses domestic raw materials and less-skilled 
labor, conserving foreign exchange. 
Does Sub-Saharan Africa Have a Comparative Advantage 
in Light Manufacturing? 
In our study of Enterprise Survey data for 89 countries, we ﬁ nd that, since 
Africa is mainly located at the less sophisticated end of the technology spec-
trum, its natural comparative advantage likely would be low-tech rather than 
high-tech manufacturing (Harrison, Lin, and Xu 2011). These data allow us to 
classify the manufacturing sectors into low tech (food and beverages, leather, 
wood processing and wood products, simple metal products, textiles, and gar-
ments) and high tech (metal and machinery, electronics, chemical and phar-
maceutical products, nonmetal and plastic products, automobiles, and parts).”4 
Africa clearly has a latent comparative advantage in low-tech manufacturing. 
And light manufacturing and a few services have a signiﬁ cantly larger employ-
ment potential than heavy manufacturing or more sophisticated services. 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s comparative advantage in light manufacturing hinges 
on whether it has an advantage in low-wage labor. Among Ethiopia, Tanzania, 
and Zambia, Ethiopia generally has the lowest wages for skilled and unskilled 
workers in ﬁ ve light manufacturing industries (table 1.1), almost a third of 
Vietnam’s in most industries—polo shirts, leather loafers, and milled wheat.
=== PAGE 47 ===
 
 
27
Table 1.1 Monthly Wages in the Light Manufacturing Sectors of Five Countries, by Skill Level
US$
China 
Vietnam 
Ethiopia 
Tanzania 
Zambia 
Product
Skilled
Unskilled
Skilled
Unskilled
Skilled
Unskilled
Skilled
Unskilled
Skilled
Unskilled
Polo shirts
311–370
237–296
119–181
 78–130
37–185
26–48
107–213
 93–173
—
—
Dairy milk
177–206
118–133
— 
31–78
30–63
13–41
150–300
 50–80
106–340
 54–181
Wooden chairs
383–442
206–251
181–259
 85–135
81–119
37–52
150–200
 75–125
200–265
100–160
Crown cork
265–369
192–265
168–233
117–142
181a
89a
—
—
510b
342b
Leather loafers
296–562
237–488
119–140
78–93
41–96
16–33
160–200
 80–140
—
—
Milled wheat
398–442
192–236
181–363
78–207
89–141
26–52
200–250
100–133
320–340
131–149
Average
305–399
197–278
154–235
78–131
77–131
35–53
153–233
 80–130
284–364
157–208
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: — = Not available.
a. Bottom of range; upper range not known.
b. Top of range; lower range not known.
=== PAGE 48 ===
28 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
These data refer to the cash wages paid to factory workers. Labor costs are 
not limited to cash wages; they also include employer contributions to pension 
plans, health and unemployment insurance, and other fringe beneﬁ ts, as well 
as employer outlays on training, housing, recreation, and so on. Although sys-
tematic data are not readily available, nonwage labor costs in China are often 
high and seem likely to rise quite rapidly, perhaps more rapidly than cash wages. 
Since nonwage labor costs in many Sub-Saharan African countries are low and 
seem likely to remain so, expanding wage comparisons to include the full costs 
borne by employers seems certain to increase the potential cost advantages 
available to African ﬁ rms entering labor-intensive light industries, both today 
and, especially, in the future.
In China, nonwage labor costs vary widely depending on location and type 
of ﬁ rm.  Urban manufacturers in the organized sector face substantial payouts. 
The labor costs of rural manufacturers and informal enterprises consist almost 
entirely of cash wages. Costs are expected to rise substantially in the future 
because the nonwage costs of registered urban enterprises are likely to rise and 
the range of ﬁ rms expected to pay these costs is likely to expand.
There are several reasons for expecting the overall ratio of fringe beneﬁ ts to 
cash wages to rise substantially in China in coming years. In the past, Chinese 
employers, especially in the south and in the private sector, have frequently 
ignored ofﬁ cial regulations on wages, hours, and safety net contributions. 
Focusing on fringe beneﬁ t contributions, Banister (2005, 27) writes, “Noncom-
pliance is rampant and penalties are rarely enforced.” The same has been true 
in other dimensions of employment and compensation. Employers have used 
a variety of tactics to escape payment: underreporting earnings (Banister 2005, 
28); simply ignoring laws and regulations; or substituting “contractors” (that 
is, workers supplied by local employment agencies often associated with the 
municipal labor bureau) for formal workers, a device that leaves the employ-
ment agency to cover (or, most probably, to ignore) contributions for fringe 
beneﬁ ts.5 Another big loophole arises from the presence of large numbers of 
migrant workers in Chinese urban factories; migrants are generally excluded 
from social programs aimed at registered urban residents.
Chinese authorities are gradually increasing their enforcement of existing 
regulations. In addition, recent legislation, particularly three laws enacted in 
2008—the labor contract law, the employment protection law, and a statute 
governing mediation and arbitration of labor disputes—have strengthened the 
position of employees in labor-management relations, including migrant work-
ers whose lack of urban residence permits had previously disqualiﬁ ed them 
from participating in municipal health, welfare, and pension programs. Aca-
demic summaries report that this legislative package will “increase labor costs” 
and “enhance labor costs of the enterprises,” a view emphatically endorsed by
=== PAGE 49 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
29
employers during ﬁ eld visits to export-oriented manufacturers in Guangdong 
and Fujian (Zhao and Zhang 2010).
Access to beneﬁ ts is expected to increase as a result of several trends:
• The 2008 labor legislation envisions a general formalization of labor rela-
tions, so that we should expect (a) tightening up of supervision and over-
sight, which will increase compliance among formal urban ﬁ rms and also 
reduce the frequency with which local government agencies collude with 
employers in arrangements that effectively exclude substantial numbers 
of workers from participating in pension and safety net programs, and 
(b) increased pressure on the part of workers, including migrants, to beneﬁ t 
from arrangements mandated by laws and regulations. This will occur partly 
because of the new laws and partly because of market trends that increase 
workers’ choice and thus bargaining power.
• There is a modest but growing tendency for some provinces and cities to 
lower (with the intent of eventually eliminating) long-standing barriers that 
restrict the migration of rural people into the cities and limit the eligibility of 
migrant workers to participate in pension, health care, education, and other 
systems designed to beneﬁ t registered urban residents.
• Chinese authorities have initiated a gradual expansion of pension, health, 
and safety net systems, initially established for the sole beneﬁ t of regular 
urban residents, to include growing participation by rural residents.   
While the impact of these changes will be gradual rather than sudden and 
while some of the changes will not affect manufacturing costs, the cumulative 
impact on factory labor costs is likely to be substantial. For example, Yiping 
Huang (2010, 74, emphasis added) plausibly speculates, “If urban employers 
made social welfare contributions on behalf of their migrant workers, their 
payrolls could rise by 35–40 percent.” Chinese exporters, particularly in labor- 
intensive sectors like apparel, depend almost entirely on migrants to ﬁ ll low- 
and semiskilled positions. A realistic appraisal of China’s current political 
economy should include the expectation that the next 5–10 years will likely see 
a move to allow migrants working in urban factories to join at least some of 
the pension, health care, unemployment, and other programs described above. 
Any reform of this sort will further enlarge the substantial labor cost advantage 
available to Sub-Saharan African entrants into the light industry sectors that 
are the focus of this report. 
A low-wage advantage alone does not guarantee Sub-Saharan Africa a 
comparative advantage in less-skilled labor-intensive manufacturing. As Sub- 
Saharan Africa competes with other low-wage regions (for example, South Asia), 
at least two other factors come into play. First, productivity is as important as 
wages in determining comparative advantage. Second, because wages and labor
=== PAGE 50 ===
30 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
productivity vary across sectors, sector speciﬁ city is an important determinant 
of a country’s comparative advantage in labor-intensive light manufacturing 
(table 1.2). Relative to East Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa’s labor productivity is low 
except in some sectors in some countries. In sectors in which Ethiopia has a 
comparative advantage, also characterized by competition, good management 
can elevate labor productivity to a point comparable to that of the average ﬁ rm 
in China or Vietnam. 
Physical labor productivity in the three African countries falls within the 
range observed in Chinese and Vietnamese ﬁ rms (although product quality 
may fall short of their standards, as occurs with polo shirts) except for wooden 
chairs and also Chinese ﬂ our milling, where the productivity ﬁ gures shown 
in table 1.2 pertain to small operations located far below the domestic best- 
practice frontier.6 When low wages are paired with the number of products 
a worker can produce in a day (labor productivity) in a well-managed ﬁ rm, 
Ethiopia and Tanzania have a labor cost advantage. The production of one to 
seven pieces of footwear per employee per day in Ethiopia and four to six in 
Tanzania conﬁ rms this (table 1.2). On closer inspection, labor productivity is 
signiﬁ cantly higher in well-managed Ethiopian and even Zambian ﬁ rms. And 
if other nonlabor-related constraints are lifted, it is high enough to restore the 
ﬁ rms’ labor cost advantage. For example, labor productivity in polo shirt pro-
duction is 19 pieces per employee per day in a well-managed ﬁ rm, underscoring 
Ethiopia’s potential labor cost advantage in garments.7 This also points to the 
importance of entrepreneurial skills, which determine whether a ﬁ rm is well 
managed. 
More comprehensive evaluations also validate Sub-Saharan Africa’s com-
parative advantage in less-skilled labor. Findings of ﬁ rm survey analyses for this 
study validate the value chain results. Across Africa, our study of wages and pro-
Table 1.2 Labor Productivity in the Light Manufacturing Sectors of Five Countries
Labor productivity
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Polo shirts (pieces per employee per day)
18–35
8–14
7–19
5–20
—
Leather loafers (pieces per employee 
per day)
3–7
1–6
1–7
4–6
—
Wooden chairs (pieces per employee 
per day)
3–6
1–3
0.2–0.4
0.3–0.7
0.2–0.6
Crown corks (pieces per employee 
per day × 1,000)
13–25
25–27
10
—
201
Wheat processing (tons per employee 
per day)
0.2–0.4
0.6–0.8
0.6–1.9
1–22
0.6–1.6
Dairy farming (liters per employee 
per day)
23–51
2–4
18–71
10–100
19–179
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: — = Not available. Crown cork (bottle cap) production in Zambia is fully automated. Figures for wheat 
processing are from a sample of small enterprises in all five countries.
=== PAGE 51 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
31
ductivity in manufacturing using the Enterprise Surveys shows that—consider-
ing per capita income (a proxy for institutional environment and the quality of 
physical infrastructure, which are shown by other studies to affect ﬁ rm perfor-
mance)—value added per worker (labor productivity) does not appear to be 
consistently lower in Sub-Saharan Africa than in other regions (Clarke 2011a). 
Indeed, more countries lie above the regression line than below (ﬁ gure 1.4).8 In 
a more detailed study, also from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (invest-
ment climate assessments) for formal ﬁ rms, Harrison, Lin, and Xu (2011) 
examine the simultaneous effect of political, geographic, and business environ-
ments on ﬁ rm performance. They ﬁ nd that, after controlling for the business 
environment, productivity, and sales growth, the formal manufacturing sector 
performs as well in Africa as in other countries at a similar level of income.9 So, 
lower labor productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa’s light manufacturing sector 
does not seem to be due to the characteristics of the workforce, such as weaker 
skills and unionization. And improving the business environment should go 
a long way toward restoring African competitiveness in light manufacturing. 
In our quantitative survey of small and medium enterprises in Ethiopia, 
Tanzania, Zambia, China, and Vietnam, Sub-Saharan Africa’s workers are found 
to be as productive as workers in East Asia. 
Figure 1.4 Labor Productivity per Worker in Select Countries, 2005
0
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
value added per workers (US$)
China
Vietnam
Zambia
Tanzania
other region
fitted values
other Africa
other East Asia
Source: Clarke 2011a. 
Note: Calculations based on data from World Bank Enterprise Surveys. East Asia is China, Indonesia, 
the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. Africa is Sub-Saharan Africa only. Data are for all Enterprise 
 Surveys conducted since 2006 with at least 50 firms. Countries with GDP over US$8,000 are excluded. 
The fitted values line is from a log-log regression.
=== PAGE 52 ===
32 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Africa’s Performance in Light Manufacturing 
Weak competitiveness in nearly all light manufacturing industries and the mar-
ginal role of light manufacturing in exports and the overall economy sum up 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s performance relative to that of other developing coun-
tries. Evidently, the celebrated growth rates of the last decade were not pro-
pelled by light manufacturing. Due to tougher global competition, producers 
in Sub-Saharan Africa cannot currently sell their products even in the domestic 
market and certainly not in the global market. The outcome? A slower or even 
arrested pace of structural transformation (as evident from Sub-Saharan Afri-
ca’s exports to the world) and a widening gap in size and sophistication between 
Sub- Saharan Africa and other developing countries, particularly in Asia.
No Sign of Industrialization 
A large part of Sub-Saharan Africa’s higher GDP growth was propelled by 
price booms in agriculture and natural resources. Growth in manufacturing 
did recover from negligible values in the 1990s to about 4 percent a year dur-
ing 2000–07, but had no effect on overall growth. Manufacturing contributes 
only about 8 percent of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa today. Its gradual decline 
from nearly 11 percent in the 1980s conﬁ rms the dominance of agriculture and 
minerals and shows how far Africa is from becoming an industrial economy 
(table 1.3). Additional evidence of limited industrial progress comes from trade 
statistics and domestic production data conﬁ rming that many garments—as 
well as other light manufactures that Africa produced in the 1990s for domestic 
consumption—are now imported.
By contrast, East Asia and South Asia, the two fastest-growing developing 
regions, have enjoyed even faster growth of manufacturing, widening the gap 
with Africa. Between 1990 and 2007 East Asia sustained growth of about 10 
Table 1.3 Level of Industrialization, by Region, 1960s–2000s
manufacturing as a % of GDP 
Decade
East Asia
and the
Paciﬁ c
Europe and 
Central Asia
Latin
America and
the Caribbean
Middle
East and
North Africa
South
Asia
Sub-
Saharan
Africa
1960s
24.8
—
25.6
—
14.2
 9.4
1970s
31.5
—
26.5
—
15.7
10.1
1980s
31.5
—
26.5
12.3
16.1
10.7
1990s
30.4
21.3
19.6
14.2
16.1
10.8
2000s
31.1
18.5
18.0
12.1
15.7
 8.5
Source: World Bank 2010.
Note:  — = Not available.
=== PAGE 53 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
33
percent a year, expanding the share of manufacturing in the economy to about 
30 percent and laying the foundations for a strong industrial base. South Asia’s 
manufacturing has grown 7 percent a year since 2000.
Until liberalization in the 1980s, Sub-Saharan Africa’s markets were shielded 
from global competition, and many products were produced domestically. But 
in the last two decades, imports of even simple consumer products took over in 
African markets. It is now well established that competition breeds innovation, 
weeds out inefﬁ cient ﬁ rms, and encourages efﬁ cient ones to upgrade, innovate, 
and compete with new entrants, thus leading to an overall more competitive 
sector. But Sub-Saharan Africa’s manufacturing sector has deﬁ ed this trend. 
Why? Mainly because at the start of liberalization, the playing ﬁ eld was not 
level, and no one—not policy makers, academics, or donors—paid enough 
attention to light manufacturing. African nations made little effort to smooth 
the path for would-be private entrepreneurs, neglecting lessons from the post–
World War II experience of numerous formerly low-income economies—
including Japan; Taiwan, China; Hong Kong SAR, China; Singapore; the Repub-
lic of Korea; Thailand; Malaysia; China; and Vietnam—that have leveraged the 
achievements of private sector manufacturers to promote national prosperity. 
So Sub-Saharan African industries marked time, while Asian industries raced 
ahead, especially in apparel, footwear, and furniture. After trade liberalization, 
most African producers could not compete with cheaper and better-quality 
imports, especially from China, which currently dominates the global market 
for light manufactures. 
Worse yet, liberalization of input markets in Sub-Saharan Africa, when it 
occurred, typically lagged behind product market liberalization. In some cases, 
crippling restrictions on input markets remain in place even today, as is evident 
in Ethiopia’s leather industry. The lack of competition sustains high input costs, 
which further erode the competitiveness of the ﬁ nal product. Today, most Afri-
can light industries are not competitive globally, and African producers struggle 
to compete with foreign producers to sell even milk, poultry, apparel, and shoes 
in the domestic market. But the best-managed ﬁ rms in some sectors offer a 
glimmer of hope.
Manufactured Exports 
East and South Asia are good benchmarks for evaluating the contribution of 
light manufacturing to the transformation of Sub-Saharan Africa’s export bas-
ket from primary commodities to other products. Manufactured exports were 
pivotal in the catch-up of low-income East Asia with the middle-income East 
Asian Tigers in the 1980s and in the latter’s catch-up with Japan in the 1970s 
(Lin 2011). Invariably, light manufacturing preceded heavy industry. The East 
Asian model of export-led catch-up is notable for the size of the boom in manu-
=== PAGE 54 ===
34 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
factured exports and the dramatic change in the composition of exports, show-
cased here by China and Vietnam. 
Between 1990–94 and 2005–09 the share of manufactured exports in Chi-
nese exports grew from 81 to 90 percent,10 and the share in Vietnamese exports 
grew from 23 to 58 percent (table 1.4). In recent years the share of light manu-
factures in Chinese exports declined, as China diversiﬁ ed into more sophisti-
cated, high-tech products. But in Vietnam the share expanded, signaling the 
sector’s enormous potential in low-income countries. East Asia, however, is not 
the only region that leveraged export-led growth to become more prosperous, 
as Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka show (table 1.4). In 2005–09 the 
corresponding shares were just 9 percent in Ethiopia, 6 percent in Tanzania, and 
3 percent in Zambia. 
Growth in light manufacturing does not have to be tied only to exports, at 
least not in the short term. Sub-Saharan Africa’s domestic markets may be able 
to absorb increased production of some simple, low-price, import-competing 
products such as garments, furniture, and processed food. But in the medium 
term the larger scale of production and size of the market will demand an 
export-led model. Can Sub-Saharan Africa achieve export-led growth? 
The case for export-led growth in developing countries has been well estab-
lished (see World Bank 2009; Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 2010; Chenery 
1980). And recent evidence indicates that there may indeed be a case for growth 
led by exports of light manufactures in Sub-Saharan Africa (Harrison, Lin, and 
Table 1.4 Share of Manufactures in Total Exports in Select Countries in Africa and Asia, 
1990–94 and 2005–09
% of total exports 
Manufactured exports 
Light manufactures 
Country
1990–94
2005–09
1990–94
2005–09
Bangladesh
84
93
81
91
China
81
90
56
35
Ethiopia
22
13
10
 9
Indonesia
27
38
19
16
India
51
54
41
29
Cambodia
22
90
21
89
Lao PDR
33
34
32
22
Pakistan
81
81
73
71
Tanzania
13
12
10
6
Vietnam
23
58
21
43
Zambia
 3
 6
 2
 3
Sources: World Bank 2010; COMTRADE SITC, 2–3 digit classification.
=== PAGE 55 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
35
Xu 2011). More outward-oriented countries have grown faster, although estab-
lishing the direction of causality is difﬁ cult (Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 
2010). Developing countries also need to export to get the resources to import 
skills and technology to move up the value chains. And in resource-based indus-
tries there are learning effects from being exposed to global competition. 
The astounding contrast in the transformations of their export baskets two 
decades apart is clear testimony to the widening of the competitiveness gap 
between East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. In less than three decades, China 
transformed its export basket from gas, petroleum, live animals, and a few low-
tech manufactures such as fabrics and footwear to the most technologically 
sophisticated medium-tech and high-tech products. The export share of the top 
10 products in China’s export basket did not shrink with the emergence of more 
light manufactures. Instead, it rose from 20 to 27 percent, reﬂ ecting the primacy 
of light and heavy manufactures. Footwear was the only common product that 
China exported in the 1980s and 2000s (table 1.5).  
Table 1.5 exaggerates the sophistication of China’s current export bas-
ket because the contribution of Chinese factories to digital data-processing 
Table 1.5 Top 10 Non-Oil Exports of China, 1980–84 and 2004–08
1980–84
2004–08
Product
Level of
technology
%
Product
Level of
technology
%
Cotton fabrics: woven 
and unbleached
Low tech
 3.1
Complete digital data-
processing machines
High tech
 5.0
Gas and oils
Resource-based
 2.8
Peripheral units: control 
and adapters
High tech
 3.5
Linens, furnishing, 
and textiles
Low tech
 2.8
Parts and accessories
High tech
 3.2
Cotton fabrics: woven 
and dyed
Low tech
 1.9
Television, radio broad-
casting, and transmitters
High tech
 3.1
Basketwork, brooms, 
and paint rollers
Low tech
 1.9
Parts and accessories 
for machines
High tech
 3.1
Footwear
Low tech
 1.5
Footwear
Low tech
 2.2
Fabrics: woven and 
synthetic ﬁ bers
Medium tech
 1.6
Sound recorders, video 
recorders
Medium tech
 2.1
Women and infants 
outerwear and textiles
Low tech
 1.5
Electronic microcircuits
High tech
 2.0
Fine animal hair, not 
carded or combed
Primary
 1.5
Children’s toys, indoor 
games, and so on
Low tech
 1.9
Swine, live
Primary
 1.5
Outerwear knitted or 
crocheted
Low tech
 1.9
Total share
20.0
Total share
27.7
Source: COMTRADE, SITC 2–3 digit.
=== PAGE 56 ===
36 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
machines and other “high-tech” products often consists mainly of assembly 
and packaging. Even so, the rising share of “high-tech” products in China’s 
export basket demonstrates the capacity of Chinese ﬁ rms to capture substan-
tial (and growing) shares of the value chains for products like desktop and tab-
let computers, smart phones, and printers that enjoy steep growth in demand 
and therefore contribute to China’s rapid expansion of manufacturing output, 
employment, and exports.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, unlike Asia, the same products have been exported for 
more than three decades. Of the ﬁ ve Sub-Saharan countries listed with their top 
ﬁ ve exports, only Nigeria and Benin have expanded into low-tech exports (ﬁ g-
ure 1.5). Expanding the list shows that six of the top nine exports retained their 
place in Sub-Saharan Africa’s export basket between 1980 and 2008. None of these 
were manufacturing items in 1980. By 2008 three products—iron ore, fuels, and 
tea—were replaced with diamonds, wood, and tobacco. Despite ample wood 
resources, as late as 2008, most of Sub-Saharan Africa was not processing simple 
sawlogs into furniture or roasting coffee for export. 
Figure 1.5 Top Five Exports from Select Economies in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, 
1980 and 2009 
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Singapore
Taiwan, China
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Benin
Ghana
Rwanda
Uganda
Nigeria
Hong Kong 
SAR, China
Hong Kong 
SAR, China
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Singapore
Taiwan, China
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Benin
Ghana
Rwanda
Uganda
Nigeria
primary
production
resource
based
low tech
medium tech
high tech
primary
production
resource
based
low tech
medium tech
high tech
Top 5 exports in 1980–85
Top 5 exports in 2005–09
Source: PRMED Export Diversification webtool (based on COMTRADE statistics and adaptation of UNIDO’s 
 technology definition).
Note: Data for Ethiopia is 1990–95.
=== PAGE 57 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
37
The Dual Industrial Structure in Africa 
Overwhelming evidence from new research, including this study, indicates that 
the constraints on ﬁ rms vary by size, so a one-size-ﬁ ts-all approach is likely 
to be ineffective. Small and large ﬁ rms need to be treated separately, with the 
eventual goal of integrating them into comprehensive value chains. In light 
manufacturing, in particular, a prerequisite for exporting today is having the 
capability to fulﬁ ll large orders competitively (price and quality) and quickly. 
Both require tapping into scale economies associated with labor-intensive, 
assembly-line production chains—that is, large ﬁ rm operations. By deﬁ nition, 
smaller ﬁ rms cannot do this. 
There are very few medium or large companies, and those that survive strug-
gle to compete with imports. The striking paucity of medium and large ﬁ rms 
explains immediately why Sub-Saharan Africa’s light manufacturing cannot 
grow or chart an export-led growth trajectory. With the population of light 
industry enterprises skewed toward the proliferation of small ﬁ rms, light manu-
facturing is constrained from playing a larger role in the domestic economy 
and virtually barred from exports. The small number of medium and large 
ﬁ rms inhibits competition, discourages large new entrants, including would-be 
foreign investors, and stunts the sector.  
It is not clear why there is such a glaring absence of large ﬁ rms. Our study 
ﬁ nds that ﬁ rm growth11 in a sample of small and medium producers of gar-
ments, leather products, processed foods, wood products, or metal products 
has been as robust within Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia during 2008–10 as 
in Asia (Fafchamps and Quinn 2011). There is a substantial overlap in growth 
across the ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia—most Chinese ﬁ rms in 
this sample did not grow much faster during 2008–10 than ﬁ rms in Africa or 
Vietnam. 
One explanation for the near absence of large ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan  Africa’s 
light manufacturing pertains to the skills required to organize and man-
age medium and large ﬁ rms. The capabilities of small entrepreneurs are 
not adequate for graduating from the typical small enterprise into the very 
different population of mid-size manufacturers, which need in-depth in- 
dustry knowledge and experience in managing a certain scale of operation 
(Sutton and  Kellow 2010). Söderbohm (2011) conﬁ rms this ﬁ nding: “The 
striking fact is that small manufacturing enterprises almost always stay small 
.  .  . there is a huge (10-fold) gap in value added per head between manufac-
turing ﬁ rms employing more than 50 workers and those employing fewer 
than 10 workers.”
Another explanation could be that Asian governments facilitate the process 
that small entrepreneurs need if they are to grow into medium and larger ﬁ rms. 
Firm size in Sub-Saharan Africa is positively associated with the stock of capital, 
machinery, and land, although information on land is sparse (Fafchamps and
=== PAGE 58 ===
38 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Quinn 2011). That association may explain why ﬁ rms in the industrial parks 
in China can overcome these hurdles and gain access to these factors, exploit 
scale economies through modern technology that facilitates assembly line pro-
duction, and grow into larger ﬁ rms. The qualitative interviews of ﬁ rm owners 
validate this hypothesis. 
A closer look reveals that Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia produce a vari-
ety of simple manufactured goods from metals fabrication to agribusiness. But 
these goods are produced by a very large, dynamic informal sector that caters 
to the low end of the domestic market, generally with lower-quality goods that 
have no direct competition from imports. The informal ﬁ rms start out small 
and take advantage of lower wages and lower costs of doing business (avoiding 
taxes and regulations), but they remain small due to their lack of other factors of 
production. Their labor productivity cannot match that of larger Chinese ﬁ rms. 
Without exception, the owners of informal ﬁ rms do not have access to the 
land needed to expand the scale of production. So, while they do not need 
ﬁ nance to start-up, they cannot grow to the size of an East Asian ﬁ rm. The lack 
of land ownership precludes the use of land as collateral to obtain ﬁ nancing to 
purchase better machines and increase productivity. Clearly, attention to ﬁ rm 
size will be crucial to any policy interventions targeted at jump-starting light 
manufacturing in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
A very large number of small, mostly informal, ﬁ rms engage in low-productivity 
work. The vast majority of ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan Africa are small, with many 
owned and operated by household members, mostly in the informal sector.12 In 
Zambia, for example, about 84 percent of workers are in informal enterprises 
(World Bank 2011). In many countries in the region, wages are far lower in the 
informal sector than in the formal sector. Workers in large privately owned ﬁ rms 
in Ghana and Tanzania earn more than twice as much as similar workers in small 
ﬁ rms and self-employed persons (Rankin, Sandefur, and Teal 2010). The pat-
tern is similar in Zambia, where sales and labor costs per worker are both very 
low among small and medium enterprises. The average monthly labor costs per 
worker were about US$120 a month in 2009 for the large, formal ﬁ rms in urban 
areas (qualitative interviews), US$95 a month for registered small and medium 
enterprises in urban areas, and only US$43 a month for unregistered small and 
medium enterprises in urban areas (Clarke 2011a). 
The implications of this split are clear. Low wages are a clear signal of the low 
productivity of at least 84 percent of the Zambian labor force, employed either 
in agriculture or in the urban informal sector. Similar circumstances prevail 
throughout the economies of Sub-Saharan Africa. Efforts to raise labor pro-
ductivity and wages must build on a systematic effort to dismantle barriers that 
have limited the pace of structural change in Sub-Saharan Africa to a crawl, 
even though the experience of Asian economies demonstrates the feasibility of 
rapidly and substantially transforming poor economies.
=== PAGE 59 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
39
China’s success has earned it a huge share of the global market for apparel 
and other labor-intensive products. Steep increases in the cost of Chinese labor 
and real estate have begun to erode Chinese competitiveness in these sectors. 
Just as Chinese manufacturers replaced former exporters of labor-intensive 
goods based in Japan; Taiwan, China; and Hong Kong SAR, China, we now 
stand on the brink of a new transition that will shift the manufacture of labor-
intensive products away from current bases along China’s southern and eastern 
coastline.
This report highlights the opportunity for economies in Sub-Saharan Africa 
to participate in this transition. Episodes of success within the region, including 
the export of cut ﬂ owers from Ethiopia’s newly developed rose plantations and 
the emergence of Zambia’s production of corrugated rooﬁ ng sheets illustrate 
the potential inherent in these industries.13 
The report advocates a package of feasible and inexpensive policies to pro-
mote the expansion of labor-intensive light manufacturing. This report, backed 
by a panoply of comprehensive and detailed research materials, lays out a path 
that can combine local labor, local (and some imported) materials, and local 
(and imported) entrepreneurship to jump-start a development process that can 
expand the capacity of local producers to increase their share in local and even-
tually overseas markets for garments, leather products, processed agricultural 
goods, wooden furniture, and simple metal products.  
Strategy for a Competitive Light Manufacturing Sector in 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s potential in light manufacturing is huge because of its 
comparative advantages arising from low labor costs and abundant natural 
resources. These resources seem well suited for an expansion of manufacturing 
capacity that can replace imports and capture overseas markets for garments, 
leather goods, and processed agricultural products.  
While exports of wooden furniture and simple metal products may not be 
feasible in the short term, there is ample local demand for them if they can 
compete with imports. For example, even though Ethiopia has enormous unex-
ploited potential in timber, particularly bamboo, urban households purchase 
imported furniture. Why? Because the local price of US$667 a cubic meter 
of timber in Ethiopia prevents local furniture makers from competing with 
imports from China, where the corresponding price of timber is US$344, or 
Vietnam, where it is US$146–US$246. Under these circumstances, policies that 
support the commercialization of domestic timber resources hold the promise 
of saving foreign exchange and supporting large numbers of workers at wages 
well in excess of current earnings in farming or informal jobs.
=== PAGE 60 ===
40 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Africa’s potential varies by country and sector, and any strategy to boost the 
competitiveness of light manufacturing must recognize these speciﬁ cs. Above 
all, Sub-Saharan Africa’s comparative advantage in light manufacturing rests on 
the efﬁ ciency gains associated with competition in foreign and domestic mar-
kets, which guarantees the availability of key inputs at the best quality and low-
est cost. Competing imports provide a good benchmark for the sector’s global 
competitiveness. 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s greatest asset is its large pool of low-wage, less-skilled 
workers whose productivity in well-managed ﬁ rms in some subsectors may 
already approach levels observed in China and Vietnam (tables 1.1 and 1.2). 
While labor productivity in the average ﬁ rm is low, with the aid of good man-
agement and technical assistance, it can be elevated to move toward the produc-
tivity of the best-managed ﬁ rms. The crux lies in the low skill requirements of 
light manufacturing subsectors, which make it possible to train, quite cheaply, 
an unskilled garment worker in about two weeks.14 While this advantage is 
unlikely to be permanent, or applicable to all countries, it provides an oppor-
tunity to promote new industries that may, like China’s, prosper for decades 
and create millions of productive jobs, much as East Asia did early on and as 
Bangladesh and Vietnam are doing today. 
To move the labor productivity of the average ﬁ rm toward current domestic 
best practice does not require providing costly training for all workers. The chief 
ingredient is new or improved enterprise management together with targeted 
technical assistance—the impact of which can already be seen in the Ethio-
pian shoes industry. The detailed studies undertaken as part of this study dem-
onstrate the feasibility of substantially improving management within small 
ﬁ rms through inexpensive, short-term training programs (Sonobe, Suzuki, and 
Otsuka 2011). Furthermore, once begun, the process of upgrading can become 
self-sustaining, as word spreads of the tangible beneﬁ ts accruing to early par-
ticipants in training seminars. Attracting new investors, particularly overseas 
entrepreneurs who can provide hands-on production and marketing experience 
in the target industries as well as ﬁ nancial resources and technical expertise, can 
accelerate the process of industrial expansion and structural change. 
Sub-Saharan Africa is fortunate to be well endowed with key inputs and raw 
materials for light manufacturing. If high-quality inputs are not available locally 
at the beginning of the expansion process, modest reforms can establish reliable 
supply chains (for example, for high-quality fabrics or leather) and therefore 
expand the scope of potentially competitive manufacturing activity. More efﬁ -
cient organization can yield huge savings in transport costs in industries that 
are located far from a port and require hauling high-volume, high-weight mate-
rials. Commercialization of domestic inputs like timber, bamboo, and leather 
can economize on time as well as foreign exchange and increase the capacity of 
domestic producers to respond quickly to shifts in demand.
=== PAGE 61 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
41
The arithmetic of trade logistics costs validates the enormous potential gains 
from using Sub-Saharan Africa’s input markets to jump-start its light manufac-
turing product markets. The case of raw materials for Ethiopia’s leather products 
industry illustrates this point. Despite having some of the best hides in the world 
due to a favorable climate, Ethiopia employs only 8,000 workers in this sector, 
while Vietnam, which has the same amount of land and population, employs 
600,000. As discussed in detail in chapter 8, some short-term policy measures can 
go a long way to restore Ethiopia’s comparative advantage in this sector: eliminate 
export and import restrictions on leather; implement a program to control “ecto-
parasites,” a skin disease that adversely affects the quality of leather; and modify 
bank arrangements to allow the use of cattle as collateral. Longer-term reforms 
such as modifying land tenure to allow large-scale herding would also help. 
The Ingredients of Success 
In sum, Sub-Saharan Africa has all the necessary inputs for a competitive light 
manufacturing sector: a comparative advantage in low-wage labor, abundant 
natural resources sufﬁ cient to offset its low labor productivity relative to its 
Asian competitors, privileged access to high-income markets for exports, and 
in most cases a sufﬁ ciently large local or regional market to allow emerging 
producers to develop capabilities in quick-response, high-volume production, 
and quality control in preparation for breaking into highly competitive export 
markets. For industries requiring quick access to the coast, Tanzania has a spe-
cial advantage. But for industries competing with Chinese ﬁ rms, landlocked 
Zambia, where there is no such access, instead has natural protection for indus-
tries whose products are high in volume and heavy in weight. 
We already see instances in which well-managed up-to-scale ﬁ rms, working 
in an environment of competition in both product and input markets, have suc-
ceeded in raising their productivity to the level of current Asian export leaders. 
This report proposes that governments in Sub-Saharan Africa follow the course 
pioneered by a succession of Asian nations by taking the initiative to accelerate 
the realization of latent comparative advantage in segments of light manufac-
turing in which speciﬁ c, feasible, sharply focused, low-cost policy interventions 
can deliver a quick boost to output, productivity, and perhaps exports, opening 
the door to expanded entry and growth. In Sub-Saharan Africa, as in Asia, key 
elements in nurturing developments that can lead to a process of self-sustaining 
growth include liberalizing access to foreign exchange, imported inputs, and 
overseas product markets; fostering competition in domestic markets for inputs 
and outputs; improving domestic infrastructure; offering tax concessions for 
industrial start-ups; providing short-term training opportunities for workers 
and managers; and offering generous incentives to attract overseas entrepre-
neurs capable of ﬁ lling gaps in domestic stocks of technical knowledge, mana-
gerial skills, market experience, and liquid funds.
=== PAGE 62 ===
42 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Growing Markets Inside and Outside Africa 
In recent years, four factors have opened new markets for Sub-Saharan Africa’s 
light manufacturing ﬁ rms. 
• First, faster economic growth has expanded the size of the domestic mar-
ket for manufactures in most countries. New markets thus offer new 
opportunities. 
• Second, foreign investors and aid agencies in Sub-Saharan Africa are invest-
ing in the production of manufactures destined for their own markets or 
foreign markets. Examples include the U.S. Agency for International Devel-
opment’s technical assistance to Rwandese coffee farmers, culminating in a 
Starbucks contract for exports of locally washed and dried Rwandese coffee 
to the United States. Similar technical support helped a honey producer to 
learn how to comply with the phytosanitary standards required to begin 
exporting fresh honey to Trader Joe’s, a U.S. supermarket. The arrival of 
Chinese, Indian, and Middle Eastern investors is also likely to open doors to 
more new markets. 
• Third, for globally competitive light manufacturing in Sub-Saharan Afri-
can ﬁ rms, the market is the world—and that is huge. In 2005 the United 
States established new trade preferences under the African Growth and 
Opportunity Act (AGOA), granting Sub-Saharan African products excep-
tionally favorable access to the United States, while the EU did so under 
the Cotonou Agreement. These trade preferences are critical to African 
exporters’ success in the global apparel market, for without trade prefer-
ences, they are unable to compete with efﬁ cient global exporters in the U.S. 
or EU markets.15 
• Fourth, regional integration within Africa further increases the attractive-
ness of growing domestic markets. For example, Ethiopia’s participation in 
regional trade agreements has opened up new markets. Ethiopia is a found-
ing member of two regional blocs: the Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD)16 and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern 
Africa (COMESA).17
China’s Growing Labor Cost Disadvantage: An Opportunity for Africa 
Chinese products have penetrated almost every corner of the global market. In 
2004 China supplied 18 percent of the total value of the combined U.S. and EU 
market imports, and in 2008, it supplied 35 percent. To export light manufac-
turing products, Sub-Saharan producers have no choice but to compete with 
China, even in the U.S. market. 
But the capacity of coastal Chinese ﬁ rms to outperform rivals based in low-
income nations on both price and quality in global markets for labor-intensive
=== PAGE 63 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
43
light industry manufactures has begun an irreversible process of decline. With 
the depletion of its large pool of less-skilled workers, rapid cost increases, par-
ticularly in wages and nonwage labor expenses, have begun to price growing 
numbers of China’s coastal export ﬁ rms out of global markets for an expand-
ing array of labor-intensive light industrial products. Some of the displaced 
production will shift to China’s inland provinces, but the rise of new manu-
facturing clusters is already evident in countries like Vietnam, Cambodia, and 
Bangladesh, where infrastructure and supply chain arrangements cannot match 
the enviable circumstances available in coastal Chinese localities like Shenzhen 
and Dongguan.
Rising wages, stiffening enforcement of labor and environmental regulations, 
gradual expansion of costly safety net provisions, and the prospect of further 
increases in the international value of China’s renminbi currency mean that the 
erosion of China’s comparative advantage in the export of labor-intensive man-
ufactures will continue and quite possibly accelerate (ﬁ gure 1.6). This prospect 
creates an opportunity for Sub-Saharan African nations to jump-start struc-
tural changes in their domestic economies that hold the promise of delivering 
large and sustained increases in output, exports, employment, productivity, and 
incomes. China’s efforts to limit the upward drift of its renminbi currency have 
Figure 1.6 Labor Productivity and Average Wage Rates in Manufacturing in China, 1979–2009
Chinese labor productivity (US$)
average wages (US$)
0
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
5,000
labor productivity in manufacturing (left axis)
wages (right axis)
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China 2011; Lin 2011.
=== PAGE 64 ===
44 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
contributed to substantial domestic inﬂ ation, which spurs wage demands and 
accelerates the erosion of cost advantages in labor-intensive manufactures.  
This opens an entry point for other low-wage producers, including ﬁ rms 
based in Sub-Saharan Africa, if they can learn to compete. But low-income 
South Asia, East Asia, and the Middle East and North Africa will be hot con-
tenders for newly available slices of the global market. The challenge facing Sub-
Saharan ﬁ rms is whether they can compete with ﬁ rms in Bangladesh, India, and 
Nepal, as well as Vietnam, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, and Cambo-
dia, which have low wages and large pools of less-skilled labor. But even a small 
slice of the global apparel market would create millions of higher-productivity 
and higher-wage jobs in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Past Policy Prescriptions: An Intimidating “To Do” List 
Is everything a problem? Past studies reviewing constraints to the expansion of 
light manufacturing in Sub-Saharan Africa often come up with a staggeringly 
long list, which suggests that no feasible set of policy adjustments could make 
the region or any country attractive to investors. Most frustrating about this 
list of constraints is the implication that unless all shortcomings are ﬁ xed, the 
sector cannot grow. 
Yet we know that other economies managed to expand production and 
exports of light manufactures without ﬁ rst resolving the same sorts of con-
straints currently observed in Sub-Saharan Africa. Visitors to China in the mid-
1970s and early 1980s were appalled by low product quality (for example, sewing 
machines that leaked oil onto the fabric, electric motors that failed in hot, humid 
weather), passive management (one manager at a large plant insisted that he did 
not know the unit cost of his product; another, asked to explain the presence of 
numerous idle workers, said, “If we didn’t employ them, where would they go?”), 
administrative confusion (would-be investors left the Xiamen Special Economic 
Zone in disgust after managers failed to provide ﬁ rm prices for land, electricity, 
or water), delays in moving merchandise through customs and port facilities, 
lackadaisical attitudes toward customer needs, and others. 
Emerging manufacturers in Sub-Saharan Africa must, of course, compete with 
today’s Chinese ﬁ rms, not with the much weaker Chinese enterprises of the 1980s. 
But, as noted, powerful market forces have begun to undermine the competitive 
advantage of China’s well-established coastal centers of labor-intensive manufac-
turing. This process, which has been widely remarked by visitors to the region for 
at least ﬁ ve years, reﬂ ects irreversible forces that seem certain to intensify.  
As China’s coastal producers of apparel, leather products, and other labor-
intensive manufactures suffer a continued squeeze on proﬁ tability, they will 
either shift to other lines of business or move to locations in China’s interior,
=== PAGE 65 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
45
in other Asian nations (Bangladesh, Cambodia, or others), or—as suggested in 
this report—in Sub-Saharan Africa.  
The recommendations of this report, based on intensive study of speciﬁ c 
sectors in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia, draw on the experience of coun-
tries like China and Vietnam, which managed to build thriving light industries 
despite the handicap of problematic initial conditions. The logic underlying our 
recommendations is simple and direct.  
While it will be very difﬁ cult for newly emergent African manufacturers to 
match the price and quality advantages of well-established market leaders in 
China’s coastal regions, the gradual erosion of these ﬁ rms’ competitive advan-
tage has begun and seems certain to continue.  This will create growing oppor-
tunities initially, for African ﬁ rms to build up their share of domestic sales of 
labor-intensive manufactures and, then, with the accumulation of skill, experi-
ence, and ﬁ nancial strength, to enter global markets in competition with new 
entrants from China’s interior and from countries like Bangladesh and Cambo-
dia, whose economies suffer from some of the same difﬁ culties and constraints 
now visible in Ethiopia and its neighbors. As in China and Vietnam, provision 
of attractive incentives to recruit international entrepreneurs and attract over-
seas direct investment can accelerate the process and, in particular, expedite the 
pace of entry into global markets.
The approach proposed in this report is to use intensive study of speciﬁ c 
light industry sectors to identify concrete packages of speciﬁ c, feasible, and 
inexpensive policy initiatives that can create maximum opportunity to jump-
start the growth of production, employment, and exports.
The speciﬁ cs of our light manufacturing analysis form the main theme of 
part II of this report. The following paragraphs focus on economywide issues 
confronting the nations of Sub-Saharan Africa. 
The experience of China, Vietnam, and many other poor nations shows 
that development prospects beneﬁ t from macroeconomic stability and from 
a business environment that encourages rather than obstructs entrepreneurial 
initiative. Recent improvements conﬁ rm that, for many African countries, the 
formerly problematic macroeconomic environment is no longer a critical con-
straint on industrial growth. In fact, Ethiopia is among several nations in Sub-
Saharan Africa that have achieved success both in improving macroeconomic 
conditions (less inﬂ ation, lower deﬁ cits) and in providing opportunities to pri-
vate entrepreneurs during the past decade. International experience also shows 
that manufacturing can expand rapidly, despite the presence of problematic 
institutional arrangements. In China, for example, laws recognizing the govern-
ment’s obligation to protect the property rights of private businesses appeared 
only after 2000 and still lack clearly speciﬁ ed implementation mechanisms; in 
addition, private businesses continue to have little access to bank lending or to 
formal ﬁ nancial markets.
=== PAGE 66 ===
46 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Although Sub-Saharan Africa receives unfavorable rankings for many con-
straints identiﬁ ed by the World Bank’s Doing Business project, evidence from 
this study’s quantitative and enterprise surveys shows that circumstances facing 
Sub-Saharan ﬁ rms are not notably different from conditions surrounding their 
counterparts in China (Harrison, Lin, and Xu 2011). These constraints may 
be important, but, as Chinese experience demonstrates, they need not provide 
impassable barriers to expansion and upgrading. 
One effective method of identifying binding constraints that we have pursued 
in this project is to ask ﬁ rm managers what they see as the biggest constraints 
facing their businesses. The results of our investigation include the following. 
Although the constraints vary considerably across countries, some patterns 
appear common (Clarke 2011b). Basic problems such as reliability of power 
supply, access to ﬁ nance, access to land, and macroeconomic instability usu-
ally dominate at low income levels. Taxes, corruption, and crime become more 
important as income rises (before falling again). And labor regulation and the 
availability of skilled workers become more important for middle-income coun-
tries (Gelb and others 2007). In addition, we ﬁ nd consistent differences between 
the perspectives of large and small ﬁ rms. Managers of small ﬁ rms express deep 
concern over limitations arising from their lack of access to ﬁ nance. Managers 
of large ﬁ rms, by contrast, are more likely to identify troublesome labor regula-
tion and inadequate worker education as major issues. 
While managers’ responses differ across sectors, quantitative analysis typi-
cally ﬁ nds considerable association between measures of ﬁ rm performance 
(proﬁ ts, productivity, growth) and the quality of available infrastructure, par-
ticularly infrastructure pertaining to transportation and trade. Some studies 
have found that burdensome regulation (and labor regulation in particular) is 
associated with slower growth of ﬁ rms. By contrast, these studies tend to ﬁ nd 
little association between ﬁ rm performance and the prevalence of corruption.
A Selective and Practical Approach: Resolve the Most 
Critical Constraints in the Most Promising Subsectors 
Despite these favorable observations about macroeconomic circumstances and 
business environment in Sub-Saharan Africa, it is evident that efforts to acceler-
ate the development and structural transformation of African economies con-
front very substantial obstacles, particularly those that involve ﬁ nance, infra-
structure (electricity, roads), governance, and human capital. Because African 
governments cannot relax all of these constraints at once, we propose  taking 
a different approach to jump-starting light manufacturing. By focusing on a 
handful of carefully chosen subsectors, we have been able to leverage value
=== PAGE 67 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
47
chain analyses and other analytical devices to take a microscopic stock of the 
constraints in each subsector. Picking reasonable benchmarks and aiming for 
price competitiveness, we have trimmed the list to a few leading constraints in 
each subsector. Such priorities make the exercise more manageable, the policy 
actions more precise, and the sequencing more possible. They are also indis-
pensable in pointing to the few most critical steps that Sub-Saharan govern-
ments can take to remove the most serious constraints in the most promising 
subsectors ﬁ rst and to exploit the potential for light manufacturing. 
This study has new features. First, the detailed studies at the subsector and 
product levels show that constraints vary by country, sector, and ﬁ rm size. This 
explains why previous economywide reforms could not relieve the bottlenecks 
that exist in each sector. The wide range of constraints indicates, ﬁ rst, that the 
solution to light manufacturing problems cuts across many sectors and does 
not lie just in manufacturing. Solving the problem of manufacturing inputs 
requires solving issues in agriculture, education, and infrastructure. Second, 
precisely because of these links, developing countries cannot afford to wait until 
all of the problems across sectors are resolved. Instead, a focused approach, 
such as the one recommended here, is needed. Third, because of the unique 
structure of Africa’s light manufacturing sector, these constraints vary by ﬁ rm 
size. Fourth, some of these constraints can be addressed through factory-level 
measures, others only by government policy, and still others only by strengthen-
ing competition. 
By identifying and addressing these constraints, African countries can 
expand light manufacturing production in areas where they have a comparative 
advantage if they ensure competition in all pertinent markets. Doing so makes 
the targeted policy solutions practical and feasible within the country’s limited 
ﬁ nancial, ﬁ scal, human resources, and political environment.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s potential competitiveness in light manufacturing is 
based on the following:
• A comparative advantage in low-wage, less-skilled labor. The average 
monthly wages for a skilled Ethiopian worker in light manufacturing is only 
25 percent of that of his/her counterpart in China and 50 percent of that 
of his/her counterpart in Vietnam. For an unskilled worker, these ratios are 
18 percent in China and 45 percent in Vietnam, indicating the signiﬁ cant 
advantage of an African producer. Expanding these comparisons to include 
nonwage labor costs, which are high and rising in China but low in Africa, 
would enlarge the potential for realizing cost savings associated with locating 
light industry production in African economies. 
• An abundance of natural resources, which can supply critical raw materials 
and inputs such as hides and skins for the footwear industry and abundant 
land for the commercial cultivation of produce for agribusiness.
=== PAGE 68 ===
48 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
While exports of some low-value, heavy-volume products such as furniture 
or simple metal products may not be feasible, there is enough local demand for 
them if they are capable of competing with imports. Ethiopia has enormous 
unexploited potential in timber, particularly bamboo, which makes its furniture 
industry competitive in the domestic market, creating more productive jobs 
than in agriculture or the informal sector and saving foreign exchange. 
Is there room for Africa in the global market today? China dominates the 
global export market in light manufactures, and its competitive edge far exceeds 
that of low-income exporters who recently entered the global market. Fortunately, 
several global factors can work in Africa’s favor if it is able to overcome the key 
constraints in the most promising subsectors. First, Sub-Saharan Africa has the 
privilege of enjoying duty-free and quota-free access to the U.S. and EU markets 
for light manufactures under AGOA and the Cotonou Agreement. Second, rising 
wages in China’s light manufacturing sector present an unprecedented opportu-
nity for Sub-Saharan Africa to take up production of many light manufacturing 
products and create millions of productive jobs. Given its negligible share in the 
global market for light manufactures, the potential for growth is huge.
Notes 
 1. Investment is considerably smaller in Sub-Saharan Africa than in more prosperous 
developing countries. During 2000–09 Sub-Saharan Africa’s investment rose mar 
ginally from 17 percent of GDP to 19 percent, compared with 26 percent in South 
Asia, the next richest region. In China and Vietnam, similar to Sub-Saharan Africa 
in the early 1980s, the share of investment in the economy was 39 and 33 percent, 
respectively (World Bank 2010).
 2. In 2009 per capita income in Sub-Saharan Africa was US$2,051 (purchasing power 
parity adjusted), only about 36 percent of that in the average developing country 
(US$5,635).
 3. Here we use the broad deﬁ nition of light manufacturing, which includes the trans-
formation of agricultural products (agribusiness).
 4. The data set has “other manufacturing,” which is not classiﬁ ed since we do not know 
its nature. 
 5. Chinese colleagues described this practice as widespread in 2007; at that time, use 
of contractors extended to Chinese factories operated by prominent foreign multi-
national manufacturers of consumer goods (author’s ﬁ eld observations).
 6. Calculations based on aggregate data for 2007 indicate that average physical labor 
productivity probably amounted to 1.45 tons per man-day.
 7. The policy challenge is to incentivize the average garment ﬁ rm to mimic well-
managed ﬁ rms. Results of the impact of the Kaizen managerial training programs 
should conﬁ rm whether there is indeed a case for transforming poorly managed into 
well-managed ﬁ rms in light manufacturing industries where managerial expertise 
is a severe constraint. In Ethiopia’s case this would apply to all except the leather 
footwear industry, although here, too, there would be a strong case for sharpening 
productivity through better management. A ﬁ rm manager’s incentive to upgrade her
=== PAGE 69 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
49
skills could be increased by exposing her to greater competition, which would weed 
out inefﬁ cient ﬁ rms.
 8. Clarke (2011a) also ﬁ nds that, although labor costs in many African countries, par-
ticularly in the resource-based economies, appear to be higher relative to those in 
East Asia countries that have been relatively successful in manufacturing, many still 
compare favorably with East Asian countries, after both labor costs and labor pro-
ductivity are considered.
 9. Here the business environment is broadly deﬁ ned to include crime, political stability, 
and government expropriation including corruption.
 10. The share of manufactures in Chinese exports: 49.7 percent in 1980; 41.6 in 1970; 
42.8 percent in 1959. Data for 1980 are from National Bureau of Statistics of China 
(2005, 68–69); data for 1959 and 1950 are from Eckstein (1977, 252).
 11. Firm growth is measured as the average change in log sales over 2008–10. The top 
and bottom 5 percent of the observations are dropped to ensure robustness to 
outliers.
 12. Although it is difﬁ cult to compare the size of the informal sector across countries 
due to difﬁ culties with both deﬁ nitions and measurement, most evidence suggests 
that the informal sector is larger in Sub-Saharan African than in other regions. 
Schneider (2005) estimates that the informal sector accounted for about 41 percent 
of GDP in the 24 African countries with data. This is similar to its share in Latin 
America, but higher than in most other regions. 
 13. In Zambia, the zero-rating of rolled steel imports in 2000 enabled the emergence of 
some 20 ﬁ rms to begin producing corrugated rooﬁ ng sheets. Zambia experienced a 
shift from trading in imported rooﬁ ng sheets toward manufacturing them itself and 
even exporting them to neighboring countries. 
 14. According to survey results for light industries, “In Ethiopia and China, 85 percent 
to 90 percent [of ﬁ rms] report that it takes at most four weeks for new workers to be 
fully trained” (Fafchamps and Quinn 2011; Sonobe, Suzuki, and Otsuka 2011, 16).
 15. Conway and Shah (2010). The recent decimation of Madagascar’s apparel produc-
tion after the removal of its AGOA eligibility is a case in point. 
 16. Other members of IGAD include Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan, Somalia, 
Uganda, and Kenya.
 17. The COMESA was established in November 1993 in Kampala, Uganda. It has 20 
member states that stretch from the Arab Republic of Egypt in the north to Swa-
ziland in the south. The current members are Angola, Burundi, the Comoros, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Madagas-
car, Malawi, Mauritius, Namibia, Rwanda, the Seychelles, Sudan, Swaziland, Uganda, 
Zambia, and Zimbabwe (Tanzania recently left COMESA). Before the formation of 
COMESA in 1993, the regional community was known as the Preferential Trade 
Area for Eastern and Southern Africa (PTA), which was established in September 
1981 and had a different treaty than the COMESA. All previous PTA members, 
except the Comoros and Somalia, have signed the COMESA treaty. COMESA has 
a combined population of close to US$400 million and GDP of about US$170 bil-
lion, respectively. The total surface area is more than 9 million square kilometers, 
of which 60 percent is endowed with rivers and lakes with a potential for irrigation,
=== PAGE 70 ===
50 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
ﬁ sheries, and hydroelectric power generation. Less than 10 percent of the arable land 
in the region is under cultivation and only 5 percent of available water is used for 
cultivation. The region has used only 4 percent of its hydroelectric potential. The 
region is also a source of wealth of minerals (Birega 2004, 14).
References 
Amoako, K. Y. 2011. “The Africa Transformation Report.” Presentation at the African 
Center for Economic Transformation “Workshop on Growth and Transformation in 
Africa,” Bellagio, Italy.
Arbache, Jorge, Delﬁ n S. Go, and John Page. 2008. “Is Africa’s Economy at a Turning 
Point?” in Africa at a Turning Point? Growth, Aid, and External Shocks, ed. Delﬁ n Go 
and John Page, 13–85. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Banister, Judith. 2005. “Manufacturing Earnings and Compensation in China.” Monthly 
Labor Review (August): 22–40.
Birega, Gebremedhine. 2004. “Preliminary Country Paper of Ethiopia on Competition 
Regime: Capacity Building on Competition Policy in Select Countries of Eastern and 
Southern Africa.” AHa Ethiopian Consumer Protection Agency, Addis Ababa. 
Chenery, Hollis. 1980.  “Interactions between Industrialization and Exports.” American 
Economic Review 70 (2): 281–87.
Clarke, George. 2011a. “Assessing How the Investment Climate Affects Firm Perfor-
mance in Africa: Evidence from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.” Background 
paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at 
http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
———. 2011b. “Wages and Productivity in Manufacturing in Africa: Some Stylized 
Facts.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in 
Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.
Conway, Patrick, and Manju Shah. 2010. “Incentives, Exports, and International Com-
petitiveness in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from the Apparel Industry.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
Eckstein, Alexander. 1977. China’s Economic Revolution. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Simon Quinn. 2011. “Results from a Qualitative Survey.”  Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fox, Louise. 2011. “Why Is the Informal Normal in Low-Income Sub-Saharan Africa?” 
Presentation at the World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Gelb, Alan, Vijaya Ramachandran, Manju Kedia Shah, and Ginger Turner. 2007.  “What 
Matters to African Firms? The Relevance of Perceptions Data.”  Policy Research Work-
ing Paper 4446, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Harrison, Ann E., Justin Y. Lin, and L. C. Xu. 2011. “Explaining Africa’s (Dis) Advan-
tage.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in
=== PAGE 71 ===
GOOD POSSIBILITIES FOR LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SSA 
 
51
Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.
Harrison, Ann, and Andres Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and 
Industrial Policy for Developing Countries.” In Handbook of Development Eco-
nomics, Vol. 5 of Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig eds., 4039–214. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland.
Huang, Yiping. 2010.  “China’s Great Ascendancy and Structural Risks.” Asian-Paciﬁ c 
Economic Literature 24 (1): 65–85.
Lin, Justin. 2010. “New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Develop-
ment.” Policy Research Working Paper 5197, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
———. 2011. “From Flying Geese to Leading Dragons: New Opportunities and Strate-
gies for Structural Transformation in Developing Countries.” Policy Research Work-
ing Paper 5702, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
McMillan, Margaret, and Dani Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and 
Productivity Growth.” International Labour Organisation, World Trade Organization, 
Boston, MA. 
National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2005. China Compendium of Statistics 1949–2004. 
Beijing: China Statistics Press.
———. 2011. China Statistical Yearbook 2010. Beijing: China Statistics Press. 
Panagariya, Arvind. 2008. India: The Emerging Giant. London: Oxford University Press. 
Rankin, Neil, Justin Sandefur, and Francis Teal. 2010. “Learning and Earning in Africa: 
Where Are the Returns to Education High?” CSAE WPS/2010-02, Centre for the Study 
of African Economies, Department of Economics, Oxford University, Oxford, U.K. 
Schneider, Friedrich. 2005. “Shadow Economies around the World: What Do We Really 
Know?” European Journal of Political Economy 21 (3): 598–642.
Söderbohm, Måns. 2011. “Firm Size and Structural Change: A Case Study of Ethiopia.” 
Paper prepared for the Plenary Session of the African Economic Research Consortium 
“Biannual Research Workshop,” Nairobi, Kenya, May. 
Sonobe, Tetsushi, Aya Suzuki and Keijiro Otsuka.” 2011. “Kaizen for Managerial Skills 
Improvement in Small and Medium Enterprises: An Impact Evaluation Study”. 
August. Background paper prepared for the Light Manufacturing in Africa Study, 
available online as Volume IV at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing.
Sutton, John, and Nebil Kellow. 2010. An Enterprise Map of Ethiopia. London: Interna-
tional Growth Center.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2011. “Best Prac-
tices in Investment for Development: Case Studies in FDI; How to Integrate FDI and 
Skill Development, Lessons from Canada and Singapore.” Investment Advisory Series, 
Series B, no. 5. United Nations, New York.
World Bank. 2009. “Ethiopia: Toward the Competitive Frontier; Strategies for Improving 
Ethiopia’s Investment Climate.” Report 48472 ET, Finance and Private Sector Develop-
ment, Africa Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 72 ===
52 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
———. 2010. World Development Indicators 2010. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011. More Jobs and Prosperity in Zambia: What Would it Take? Report 62376-
ZM, Finance and Private Sector Development Unit, Africa Region, World Bank, Wash-
ington DC.
World Economic Forum. 2011. The Africa Competitiveness Report 2011. Washington, DC: 
World Bank; Geneva: World Economic Forum.
Zhao, Shinning, and Jie Zhang. 2010. “Impact of Employment Contracts Law on 
Employment Relations in China.” Indian Journal of Industrial Relations 45 (4, April).
=== PAGE 73 ===
2
What Constrains Light 
Manufacturing in 
Sub-Saharan Africa?
The World Bank’s Regional Program for Enterprise Development has con-
ducted a comprehensive set of enterprise surveys that provide perception-based 
and objective data.  Previous analytical work to identify the investment climate 
constraints to ﬁ rm growth in developed and developing countries has followed 
two broad approaches: conducting perceptions-based surveys of ﬁ rm manag-
ers, asking what they see as the biggest barriers to their ﬁ rm’s operations and 
growth; and correlating ﬁ rm performance and various objective and subjective 
measures of the investment climate. Both approaches typically lead to a long list 
of constraints, including electricity, corruption, crime, inadequately educated 
workforce, labor regulations, business licensing and permits, and so on.
But African countries, given their limited resources, cannot afford to wait 
until all of the problems across all sectors and locations have been resolved. 
Instead, they should focus on reducing the constraints in sectors demonstrat-
ing good potential for competitiveness and employment growth. This report 
Part
=== PAGE 74 ===
54 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
highlights light manufacturing as a promising starting point. The ﬁ rst step is 
to identify the most critical constraints for each country, for each light manu-
facturing subsector, and for ﬁ rms of different sizes. Recent studies use rigorous 
analytical methods to evaluate owners’ perceptions and ﬁ rm-speciﬁ c informa-
tion from the enterprise surveys to identify the constraints on ﬁ rm growth. 
This approach was also applied to research papers commissioned for this study 
to narrow the possible list of constraints (Harrison, Lin, and Xu 2011; Dinh, 
Mavridis, and Nguyen 2010). 
In a review of the empirical literature on the investment climate and its 
effects on ﬁ rm performance in Africa, Clarke (2011) ﬁ nds that more than two-
thirds of ﬁ rm managers identify access to ﬁ nance and electricity as their top 
concerns in more than two-thirds of African countries. Access to ﬁ nance tends 
to be a greater concern for managers of small ﬁ rms, and labor regulation and 
worker education are greater concerns for large ﬁ rms. 
Main Constraints in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia 
The ﬁ ndings in this part are drawn from the following sources:
• A literature review of empirical work on the investment climate facing ﬁ rms 
in Africa as well as research papers aimed at narrowing the possible list of 
constraints 
• Qualitative interviews of about 300 enterprises (both formal and informal of 
all sizes) by the study team in three African countries (Ethiopia, Tanzania, and 
Zambia) and two Asian countries (China and Vietnam), based on a question-
naire designed by Professor John Sutton of the London School of Economics1 
• Quantitative interviews of about 1,400 enterprises (both formal and infor-
mal of all sizes) by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at Oxford 
University in the same countries, based on a questionnaire designed by Pro-
fessor Marcel Fafchamps and Dr. Simon Quinn of Oxford University 
• Comparative value chain and feasibility analysis based on in-depth inter-
views of about 300 formal medium enterprises in the same ﬁ ve countries, 
conducted by the consulting ﬁ rm Global Development Solutions, Inc. 
• A Kaizen study on the impact of managerial training for owners of small and 
medium enterprises in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Vietnam. 
These materials provide complementary perspectives. The literature review 
allows us to build on previous ﬁ ndings. The comparative value chain analysis, 
based on a small sample of relatively large ﬁ rms, allows us to benchmark the 
cost and productivity of African ﬁ rms with those of their Asian competitors. 
The quantitative surveys have a much larger sample and focus on smaller ﬁ rms
=== PAGE 75 ===
WHAT CONSTRAINS LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA? 
 
55
(including informal ones) but do not measure cost and productivity. The quali-
tative interviews, which cover both small and larger ﬁ rms, provide insight on 
issues that the other studies overlook, especially access to industrial land. And 
the Kaizen study shows how some policy interventions can help owners and 
entrepreneurs to improve ﬁ rm performance. 
In four of ﬁ ve subsectors, Africa’s advantage in money wages is wiped out 
by higher input and trade logistics costs (ﬁ gure II.1). Leather products are an 
exception, with the highest share of labor in production costs (45 percent in 
China as opposed to around 20 percent in the others). Among the up-to-scale 
and fairly well-managed companies, the production cost penalty due to lower 
labor productivity is small (except in wood products), is shielded from inter-
national competition by high transport costs, and beneﬁ ts little from technical 
assistance for ﬁ rms and workers.
Together, the analytical tools and sources of information used for this study 
indicate that in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia and across subsectors and 
sizes, six main constraints impede the competitiveness of light manufacturing: 
the availability, costs, and quality of inputs; access to industrial land; access to 
ﬁ nance; lack of entrepreneurial skills, both technical and managerial; lack of 
worker skills; and poor trade logistics. For small ﬁ rms, entrepreneurial skills, 
Figure II.1 Sources of Excess Production Costs of Medium Firms in Africa: Average across 
Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia as a Percentage of Chinese Production Cost
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
% of Chinese production cost
apparel
leather products
wood products
metal products
agribusiness
lower wages
lower labor productivity
higher input costs
higher trade costs
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
=== PAGE 76 ===
56 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
land, inputs, and ﬁ nance are the most important constraints, while for large 
ﬁ rms, trade logistics, land, and inputs are among the more important. The six 
chapters in this part address each of them in turn.
Note
 1. This questionnaire and all the others mentioned in this paragraph can be found 
online at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. 
References 
Clarke, George. 2011. “Assessing How the Investment Climate Affects Firm Performance 
in Africa: Evidence from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.” Background paper 
(Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at http://econ
.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Dinh, Hinh T., Dimitris Mavridis, and Hoa B. Nguyen. 2010. “The Binding Constraint 
on Firms’ Growth in Developing Countries.” Background paper (Light Manufactur-
ing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org
/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
Harrison, Ann E., Justin Y. Lin, and L. C. Xu. 2011. “Explaining Africa’s (Dis) Advantage.” 
Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study).  Available online in Volume 
III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 77 ===
Chapter 2
Large and small ﬁ rms alike identify input supply—including availability, qual-
ity, and cost—as a leading obstacle to developing competitive light manufac-
turing in the three African countries that are the focus of this report. Inputs 
are a binding constraint in two of ﬁ ve light manufacturing subsectors (agri-
business and wood products) and an important constraint in the other three 
(apparel, leather, and metal products). On average across the ﬁ ve subsectors, 
inputs (which represent more than 70 percent of total production costs) are 
more than 25 percent more expensive in Africa than in China (ﬁ gure 2.1), a 
20 percent production cost penalty. In most cases higher input costs wipe out 
Africa’s labor cost advantage. 
Since farm products and wood are major inputs for four of the ﬁ ve light 
manufacturing sectors that this report identiﬁ es as particularly suitable for pol-
icy attention, improving the performance of agriculture and forestry quickly 
emerges as a key item on the policy agenda for enhancing the competitiveness 
of African light manufacturing.
The main input policy issues are import tariffs (all sectors), price controls 
and export bans on agricultural products, barriers to the import and distribu-
tion of high-yield seeds, difﬁ culties in obtaining access to land and ﬁ nance for 
commercial farming, livestock, and forestry, and disease control in the livestock 
sector. 
Input issues are compounded by poor trade logistics, which add to the costs 
and delays of importing inputs that cannot be sourced locally. Currency over-
valuation and instability also compound the input issues.
Effects of Input Costs on Competitiveness
Without the ability to acquire large volumes of diverse inputs at competitive 
prices, of consistent high quality, and on short notice, Africa-based ﬁ rms cannot 
hope to achieve competitiveness in international markets. With inputs account-
ing for more than 70 percent of the total cost for light manufacturing products, 
a small variation in the price paid for inputs can wipe out any labor cost advan-
Input Industries
=== PAGE 78 ===
58 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
tage a country may have (ﬁ gure 2.1). And price competitiveness alone is not 
enough. Countries increasingly compete on the basis of their capacity to deliver 
on time large quantities of products with consistently high quality. This requires 
access to diversiﬁ ed, reliable, and plentiful sources of quality inputs. Even sim-
ple products require many inputs—a padlock, for example, has 12 parts. 
Companies in China’s coastal export belt enjoy favorable prices for many 
inputs, immense choice, and the ability to source large quantities at consis-
tently high quality with quick delivery times. The reason: China has achieved 
economies of scale and scope through its industrial clusters. Many of them 
were built around the sources of raw materials, such as the wood cluster in 
Nankang and the sugar cluster outside Ganzhou. China’s coastal regions also 
have extremely competitive input industries—for example, in textiles and steel. 
A typical Chinese garment manufacturer in Shanghai or Dongguan can choose 
among thousands of domestic fabric suppliers, many of them within a short 
distance in a textile or garment cluster, all competing to sell fabric, buttons, 
ribbon, zippers, or other supplies. Also relevant is the contribution of ofﬁ cial 
Chinese efforts, often at the local level, to facilitate the development of input 
(and output) markets as a quasi-public good: the Yiwu commodity market in 
Zhejiang Province, built through local government initiative, is now the largest 
in the world (Ding 2010). 
Figure 2.1 Impact of Higher Input Costs on Total Production Costs in Relation to China
percent
0
apparel
leather
products
wood 
products
metal
products
agribusiness
average
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
higher input costs
resulting production cost penalty
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
=== PAGE 79 ===
INPUT INDUSTRIES 
 
59
Moreover, reforms and investments in agriculture and forestry have enabled 
both China and Vietnam to develop competitive input industries for agribusi-
ness and wood products. Both can import the inputs they need—for instance, 
high-end textiles from Japan and the Republic of Korea, high-end sheep and 
goat leather from Australia, and pine wood from the Russian Federation—at 
low cost and at fast turnaround times thanks to liberal import policies, world-
class transport, and vastly improved trade logistics. 
Why Are Input Costs Higher?
Agricultural and forestry policies make wheat, animal feed, and (legal) wood—
all of which could be produced competitively in Africa—40 percent more 
expensive than in China. Domestic livestock policies also constrain the volume 
of quality leather, which could be competitively produced. High import tariffs 
and transport costs make steel 30 percent more expensive than in China. The 
absence of a competitive domestic textile industry imposes a cost penalty that 
could be manageable with good trade logistics (as in Vietnam, where having to 
import textiles adds a 3 percent production cost penalty). Firms aiming to sup-
ply domestic markets—a category that includes most small ﬁ rms in Africa—are 
further penalized by having to pay duties on imported inputs. 
Agribusiness
The price of wheat hovers around US$200–US$250 per ton in Asia, compared 
with US$300–US$350 in Ethiopia and Tanzania and over US$400 in Zambia 
(table 2.1). Since wheat accounts for more than 80 percent of the cost of ﬂ our, the 
higher prices of wheat impose a production cost penalty of at least 40 percent. 
Table 2.1 Wheat Prices in the Five Countries, 2010 Average
Price indicator
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania Zambia
Raw material inputs as % of value chain 
 85
 81
 93
 86
 87
Total cost of raw material per ton of wheat ﬂ our 
 (US$)a
322
323
408
363
625
Domestic wheat 
 Cost per ton (US$)
192
269
333
300–365
400–500
 % of total inputs
 60
73.7
78.1
—
 68 
Imported wheat 
 Cost per ton (US$)
None
208
304
261–328
None
 % of total inputs
None
—
—
— 
None
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: — = Not available.
a.  Amount reflects by-product content in wheat grains, conversion losses, and waste. Includes 10% duty for 
imported wheat in Tanzania.
=== PAGE 80 ===
60 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
A ton of wheat costs US$330 in Ethiopia, compared with about US$200 in 
China and Vietnam. With Ethiopian wheat yields generally less than 1 ton per 
hectare, versus 4 tons in Vietnam and up to 6 tons in China, Africa faces great 
challenges in producing staple crops: 
• Ethiopia and Tanzania have 10 percent import tariffs on wheat. Tanzania also 
has a 60 percent import tariff on wheat ﬂ our (import tariffs in Vietnam are 
only 2 percent). China has 15 percent import tariffs on wheat, but produces 
it at the world price (table 2.1).
• Importing, producing, and distributing high-yielding seeds and fertilizers 
are limited by policy.
• Land policy discourages irrigation and the entry of investors aiming to work 
with smallholders.
• Storage infrastructure remains poor.
• Inadequate market mechanisms fail to deliver stable, predictable prices.
• Wholesalers lack working capital.
Leather Products
Despite abundant livestock and skins in Africa, ﬁ rms have difﬁ culty ﬁ nding 
large volumes of quality African leather because of the lack of veterinary ser-
vices (diseases reduce the quality of skins), the lack of access to ﬁ nance for small 
herd holders (who cannot use their land or animals as collateral), and difﬁ cult 
access to land for potential investors in large herds as a result of the challenging 
combination of traditional and modern land rights. Measures to discourage the 
export of leather reduce the proﬁ tability of tanneries and thus impede the devel-
opment of a competitive supply chain. The tannery business is also capital and 
energy intensive, so facilitating imports of quality leather may be a more viable 
alternative to accelerate the manufacture of leather products in the short term. 
Leather products illustrate how limited, inexpensive intervention can acti-
vate Ethiopia’s latent export potential. A U.S. Agency for International Develop-
ment study ﬁ nds that the infestation rate of ectoparasites, which cause a skin 
disease in animals in Ethiopia, could be substantially reduced from 90 to 5 per-
cent with four treatments a year for each animal, costing about US$0.10 for all 
four treatments (USAID 2008). The total cost for such a program covering the 
whole country would be less than US$10 million a year, a modest amount in 
relation to the potential beneﬁ ts. Our investigations show that allowing pro-
cessed leather imports and eliminating import duties on leather and on other 
shoe parts (chemicals, glues, treads, laces, and soles) would enable Ethiopian 
shoes and other leather goods to become competitive in international markets 
in advance of any improvement in the currently poor state of trade logistics.
=== PAGE 81 ===
INPUT INDUSTRIES 
 
61
Importing leather would incur a US$1 cost penalty per pair of shoes (a 6 per-
cent production cost penalty), which would be more than offset by Ethiopia’s 
US$5 labor cost advantage per pair of shoes (US$3.50 advantage for Tanzania 
and Zambia). Removal of import duties on leather and other shoe parts would 
also expand opportunities for small-scale production of shoes and other leather 
goods for domestic consumption.
Apparel
The situation facing apparel manufacturers resembles conditions in the leather 
sector. Raw materials (fabrics, collars, threads, buttons, and the like) account for 
more than 70 percent of polo shirt production costs. The inability of African 
producers to supply most inputs for export-quality shirts would be manageable 
with good trade logistics, as material imports add only a 3 percent production 
cost penalty. But poor trade logistics almost double this penalty by adding a 
further 5 percent to the price of imported inputs. As in the case of leather, the 
Ethiopian government’s policy of encouraging investments in textile mills by 
banning the export of cotton may backﬁ re by discouraging cotton production. 
Again, nonexporters are further penalized by having to pay import duties on 
their inputs. This policy even penalizes exporters, which cannot leverage small 
ﬁ rms and sell their material waste to them. As with leather, removing tariffs on 
imported inputs (fabrics, buttons, zippers, ribbons) could enhance the pros-
pects for manufacturers targeting both the domestic and export markets and 
might also stimulate domestic production of upstream products—in this case, 
fabrics and cotton.
Wood Products
Although Africa is a major global source of precious wood, few countries have 
developed (legal) competitive sources of nonprecious wood for their domestic 
economies. They should do so for economic reasons (rapidly growing domestic 
demand as a result of population growth, urbanization, and income growth) 
and environmental reasons (most of the wood for domestic use is from illegal 
logging). The price of legal nonprecious wood is signiﬁ cantly higher in the three 
African countries than in China and Vietnam (table 2.2). Since lumber accounts 
for more than 70 percent of the cost of simple wood products (such as wooden 
chairs and doors), this price differential burdens Ethiopian makers of wood 
products with production cost penalties (versus imported goods) that average 
as much as 35 percent.
Legal wood is more expensive in Africa because of the absence of sustainable 
industrial scale plantations of fast-growing species (which could be developed 
on degraded land close to urban centers and ports) and the levy of high taxes 
(in Cameroon taxes increase the price of legal wood by 40 percent).
=== PAGE 82 ===
62 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Metal Products
Tin-free steel is US$1,610 a ton in Zambia, US$1,414 in Ethiopia, and US$1,106 
in China, imposing a production cost penalty in excess of 20 percent on makers 
of simple metal products, for which steel is more than half the cost. Half the 
price difference comes from import tariffs on the steel destined for domestic 
consumption (10 percent in Ethiopia and 20 percent in Zambia). The other 
half comes from transport costs for imported steel, a low value-to-weight item. 
Possible Solutions from Asia
Africa has comparative advantages in many subsectors of agriculture, livestock, 
and forestry. This report recommends that governments take these strengths as 
the foundation for policy initiatives aimed at kick-starting light manufacturing 
industries that make use of these potentially abundant inputs to create much-
needed nonfarm employment, expand the supply of foreign exchange through 
import replacement and export expansion, and also increase the demand for 
crops, animal products, timber, and other low-cost sectors with ample scope for 
future production increases. Such initiatives hold the promise of sparking an 
upward spiral of growth, structural transformation, productivity, employment, 
and penetration of global markets. 
To implement this strategy, African nations must remove obstacles to the 
expansion of light manufacturing. As we have seen, the chief difﬁ culty involves 
insufﬁ cient access to readily available, reasonably priced materials like hides and 
fabrics of suitable quality. 
China and Vietnam faced similar difﬁ culties at the start of their acceler-
ated entry into global markets for labor-intensive manufactured goods. They 
responded by pursuing a two-track strategy to facilitate access to inputs. First, 
they developed, early on, world-class trade logistics to support imports of 
the inputs that could not be competitively sourced domestically (chapter 5). 
Second, they reformed and provided support to help key input industries to 
become competitive. 
Table 2.2 Pine Lumber Prices in the Five Countries
Country
Price per cubic meter (US$)
Ethiopia
667
Tanzania
275
Zambia
394
China
344
Vietnam
146–246
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
=== PAGE 83 ===
INPUT INDUSTRIES 
 
63
China also transferred large numbers of government-owned enterprises 
to partial or full private ownership, instituted reforms aimed at commercial-
izing the remaining state enterprises, dismantled many ofﬁ cial controls over 
prices and resource allocation, encouraged foreign direct investment for key 
inputs (as in machine manufacturers), and developed sustainably managed 
wood plantations and competitive agricultural sectors. National and especially 
local governments supported the creation of input and output markets through 
the pro vision of land and ﬁ nancing (as for the Yiwu market in China’s Zhe-
jiang Province, developed with the initiative and support of local ofﬁ cials) and 
coordination along the value chains. China exempted exporters from taxes and 
duties on imported materials. It also provided information and technical assis-
tance on inputs, technology, and suppliers to small and medium enterprises. 
Policy Recommendations
To address input costs and quality, Sub-Saharan governments should adopt a 
two-prong strategy: they should facilitate access to inputs for light manufac-
turing by working to improve trade logistics and pushing to deepen regional 
integration (chapter 5); at the same time, they should promote efforts to 
develop the potentially competitive industries that supply key inputs for light 
manufacturing.
• Remove import tariffs on all inputs for light manufacturing, even for prod-
ucts destined for national and regional markets. Preferences are now given to 
exports through tariff exemptions on imported inputs for exported prod-
ucts. Such exemptions create a signiﬁ cant disincentive for manufacturers to 
produce for both the domestic and export markets, restricting their abil-
ity to maximize proﬁ ts in both markets. They also divide exporters (mostly 
medium and large ﬁ rms) and nonexporters (mostly small and micro ﬁ rms), 
hurting both (large ﬁ rms cannot subcontract with small ﬁ rms, as they do in 
China). Removing import tariffs is a low-cost reform: for Ethiopia, eliminat-
ing tariffs on leather, fabric, and other materials used by light manufacturers 
would reduce ﬁ scal revenues by only 2 percent (chapter 8). 
• Remove restrictions on exports of key light industry inputs such as unprocessed 
leather and cotton. Export bans are well intentioned but self-defeating. The 
objective is to secure a sufﬁ cient and cheap supply of such raw materials to 
encourage domestic processing of goods like cotton and leather. But pro-
hibiting exports eliminates an important component of demand for these 
products. This may cause an unintended chain of damaging consequences: 
a reduction in the output of the targeted materials, an increase in their 
domestic prices, erosion of potential cost advantage for manufactures that
=== PAGE 84 ===
64 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
rely on these materials, and a reduction (rather than the intended increase) 
in domestic processing of these materials. While freeing up exports of cot-
ton and leather will increase demand, and hence encourage their production, 
allowing imports of these commodities will put competitive pressure on 
domestic producers to improve quality and give manufacturers the ﬂ exibility 
to source the cheapest and best-quality inputs, thus stimulating employment 
growth and structural transformation.
• Liberalize input markets in agriculture. That is, remove the barriers to import-
ing and distributing high-performing planting materials. This is often the 
most important critical step in developing a competitive agriculture sector. 
Indeed, there is little point in investing in fertilizers, skills, and irrigation if 
high-yielding seeds are not available.
• Facilitate access to ﬁ nance for smallholders in agriculture, livestock, and for-
estry. Smallholders should be able to use land, livestock, and agricultural 
output as collateral.
• Facilitate access to land for strategic investors in the agriculture, livestock, and 
sustainable forestry sectors. Access should be facilitated through an inclusive 
and transparent process that brings clear beneﬁ ts to local communities and 
mitigates environmental impacts. Good-practice new entrants (such as stra-
tegic ﬁ rst movers) can do much to improve the performance of key input 
industries. The reforms discussed above would be essential to attracting 
such investors, but they may be long in coming, especially the politically and 
socially sensitive land reforms. So, African governments may want to remove 
some of the key constraints preventing the entry of potential strategic ﬁ rst 
movers. The Ethiopian government did this by giving 7 hectares to the ﬁ rst 
rose farm, creating the second largest export industry and, with it, 50,000 
new jobs.
• Provide technical assistance to smallholders. Technical assistance could help 
smallholders to connect with strategic investors in agriculture, livestock, 
and forestry through contract farming around nucleus farms and planta-
tions and also encourage them to respond to new market opportunities. For 
example, if veterinary extension services would teach smallholders to protect 
cattle from pests, farmers would be able to supply hides of acceptable quality 
to tanneries serving emergent domestic manufacturers of leather goods.
• Provide public goods in agriculture, livestock, and forestry. Such public goods 
include imposing disease controls, promoting standards, ﬁ ghting  illegal log-
ging, and reducing taxes on legal wood.
This chapter has discussed some issues related to input industries and pro-
posed some general solutions. But further in-depth technical analysis of these 
input industries will be needed for each individual country to solve speciﬁ c
=== PAGE 85 ===
INPUT INDUSTRIES 
 
65
industrial problems, such as how to facilitate the entry of competitive producers 
in livestock (leather and milk), food staples (wheat), industrial crops (cotton), 
and sustainable forestry (wood) in a way that beneﬁ ts local communities and 
preserves the environment. From a political economy perspective, existing dis-
tortions and restrictions in input industries inevitably provide beneﬁ ts to some 
stakeholders even as they impose much larger costs on the economy by imped-
ing the growth of manufacturing and, with it, the expansion of employment, 
productivity, and exports. In proposing and implementing reforms, analysis will 
need to identify the losers and demonstrate that the private losses arising from 
reforms will be dwarfed by the large-scale, economywide beneﬁ ts to be reaped 
following successful implementation of the reforms proposed in this report. 
References 
Ding, Ke. 2010. “The Role of the Specialized Markets in Upgrading Industrial Clusters in 
China.” In From Agglomeration to Innovation: Upgrading Industrial Clusters in Emerg-
ing Economies, ed. Akifumi Kuchiki and Masatsugu Tsuji, 270–89. Houndmills, U.K.: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
USAID (U.S. Agency for International Development). 2008. “Success Story: Ethiopians 
Learning to Fight Ectoparasites.” Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis, USAID, 
Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 86 ===

=== PAGE 87 ===
Chapter 3
Lack of access to industrial land can cripple efforts by both smaller and larger 
ﬁ rms to take advantage of market opportunities and attain a competitive opera-
tional scale. Smaller ﬁ rms need land to set up and expand a business, larger 
ﬁ rms need it to expand their factories, and both can beneﬁ t from using land as 
collateral to obtain loans. 
It is ironic that land is a constraint for most manufacturing ﬁ rms in land-
abundant Sub-Saharan Africa. As all manufacturing ﬁ rms need industrial land, 
equipped with utilities and transport links to markets, Sub-Saharan Africa’s 
huge deﬁ cit in industrial land puts land policy at the core of its industrial devel-
opment agenda (Limão and Venables 2001; Dollar, Hallward-Driemeier, and 
Mengistae 2004; Hausman, Lee and Subramanian 2005). 
In the early 1980s similar problems also emerged in China and Vietnam. 
But efﬁ cient government facilitation of access to industrial land, ﬁ rst in special 
economic zones and then throughout the domestic economy, resolved the land 
constraint in China and made them less binding in Vietnam.1 
Effects of Industrial Land on Competitiveness 
This section discusses what kind of land ﬁ rms need, how land policy shapes the 
existing pattern of land use, and why the availability of affordable and accessible 
land is vital for the growth of light manufacturing. 
Affordable Land, Reliable Utilities, and Accessible Locations 
Qualitative interviews suggest that problems acquiring land often prevent ﬁ rms 
in Sub-Saharan Africa with 4–5 employees from growing into businesses with 
more than 10–15 employees. To do so, they would need a larger workspace con-
nected to affordable and reliable utilities and offering reliable transport links 
to markets for inputs and outputs. Most small ﬁ rms are located in the owner’s 
home or in small workshops. Connecting to utilities requires large ﬁ xed invest-
ments that are typically beyond the means of small informal operators. 
Industrial Land
=== PAGE 88 ===
68 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Small business owners typically have insufﬁ cient savings and retained earn-
ings with which to purchase industrial land to expand the business. Where the 
government tries to provide factory shells outside cities, transport costs for 
hauling raw materials and products are an additional constraint. In a rare model 
where government allocates small plots of industrial land to small cooperatives, 
the rules of the cooperatives make it difﬁ cult for small ﬁ rms to grow. 
Chinese governments, especially at the local level and in coastal provinces, 
have gradually developed policies (initially inspired by the early success of a few 
special economic zones) that enable smaller ﬁ rms to expand either in organic 
(naturally developed via market forces) or synthetic (set up by authorities) 
industrial clusters or in industrial parks that jointly ease land and infrastructure 
constraints. For ﬁ rms employing 35–50 persons and looking to expand produc-
tion, the local governments are increasingly able to facilitate entry into industrial 
parks that provide “plug-and-play” factory shells to ambitious entrepreneurs. 
Problems of access to industrial land diminish for larger ﬁ rms, although 
large ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan Africa have much more difﬁ culty accessing land 
than ﬁ rms in similar size categories in East Asia. In Ethiopia, exporters (typi-
cally the larger ﬁ rms) in the preferred sectors (apparel and leather products) 
receive preferential access to cheap industrial land. More generally in Sub- 
Saharan Africa, industrial zones are usually reserved for large exporters, most 
often ﬁ rms with foreign ownership (Farole 2011). 
Access to Larger Plots of Land and Economies of Scale 
The contribution of industrial agglomeration to the growth of ﬁ rm productiv-
ity has been conﬁ rmed for the developed countries (Ciccone and Hall 1993; Lall 
2004; Lee and Zang 1998), but similar effects are evident in Chinese clusters as 
well (Fan and Scott 2003; He and Zhu 2007; Pan and Zhang 2002). Industrial 
agglomerations in China and Vietnam enable ﬁ rms to avoid problems related to 
inadequate land markets and difﬁ culty purchasing large plots of land by locat-
ing them in industrial parks where they can reap scale economies. 
Clustering in China generated large spillovers, most visible in liberalized and 
export-oriented industries in the 1980s. And by the 1990s, the spillovers from 
clustering were visible in nearly all industries, conﬁ rming the beneﬁ ts of China’s 
industrial clustering strategy, fashioned after that of the Republic of Korea (Lee 
and Zang 1998). The strategy had clear payoffs for the labor-intensive and glo-
balized industries, particularly in coastal regions such as Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and 
Guangdong provinces (He and Wang 2010). Clustering, often as a direct result 
of local government initiatives—for example, the effort of county leaders in 
Xinji Municipality, Hebei Province, to develop a local specialty in leather pro-
cessing and manufacturing—also contributed more broadly to China’s growing 
industrial competitiveness (on Xinji, see Blecher and Shue 2001; Wang 2001; 
He, Wei, and Xie 2008).
=== PAGE 89 ===
INDUSTRIAL LAND 
 
69
The Chinese industrial parks with access to plug-and-play factory shells 
enable ﬁ rms to scale up to hundreds or thousands of employees in a few years. 
By incurring the ﬁ xed costs of utility-equipped factory shells, the government 
precluded the ﬁ rms’ need for ﬁ nance to construct the factories. In recent years, 
Chinese industrial parks have gradually created one-stop shops that allow ﬁ rms 
located under their jurisdiction to simplify and speed up ofﬁ cial registration 
and regulatory transactions. Western buyers have an appetite for large orders, 
and China’s industrial parks allow ﬁ rms to scale up rapidly to meet the buyers’ 
needs. Such arrangements reduce search and transaction costs and make infor-
mation easily available to buyers and sellers.
In Vietnam, the government has a very location- and industry-speciﬁ c 
industrial land policy that actively courts large manufacturing ﬁ rms—usually 
foreign direct investment–ﬁ nanced or state-owned enterprises—and gives them 
large facilities in well-designed industrial parks, much like in China. Although 
this strategy has fueled Vietnam’s export-led growth, success is mixed. The gov-
ernment seems to have overinvested in about 233 parks, which have an average 
occupancy rate of 50 percent. The infrastructure investments to increase the 
supply of industrial land have been very successful in parks near cities but not 
in remote or backward areas,2 where the objective is to reduce poverty.3 The 
industrial parks have worked especially well for larger foreign ﬁ rms. Domestic 
investors, especially smaller ones, have access to the smaller and older parks in 
preferred sectors. Most small and medium enterprises are dispersed across cities 
in small organic clusters that the government has not nurtured. 
In Sub-Saharan Africa, distorted (or missing) land markets and an inefﬁ cient 
construction industry make developing industrial land costly. So, governments 
are turning to industrial parks, ﬁ nanced and developed by foreign investors, 
mostly from China. Most domestic ﬁ rms outside the parks are located ran-
domly, many in small organic clusters. By offering better industrial land in the 
zones, Tanzania has attracted some foreign direct investment in agroprocessing. 
Land for the Backward Integration of Supply Chains 
The comparative value chain analysis identiﬁ es land as a key input for the pro-
duction of heavy-weight, high-volume, farm-grown raw materials for light 
manufacturing such as agroprocessing (dairy and wheat), leather (ranches 
where cattle are bred for the meat and leather industries), and wood (planned 
afforestation; see Global Development Solutions 2011). The cost savings from 
the large-scale production of local raw materials can make a signiﬁ cant differ-
ence in the competitiveness of light manufacturing. 
For landlocked Ethiopia and Zambia, the gains from co-location of materi-
als production and processing increase with distance from the coast. But for 
coastal countries, too, the potential gains from the backward integration of the 
supply chain for local raw materials are large. Sourcing domestic raw materials
=== PAGE 90 ===
70 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
requires commercial land, but the absence of a land market in Ethiopia hinders 
commercial farming and forestry. Land policy limits the entry of large farm-
ers: Ethiopia has only two or three large farms with industrial operations. The 
success associated with exceptional cases—notably rose plantations that now 
employ as many as 50,000 workers—illustrates the large potential payoff to 
enterprise-friendly reform of landholding arrangements.
Land for Affordable Housing 
Shortages of residential housing and affordable transport for industrial work-
ers in Sub-Saharan Africa lead to some combination of higher wages (to attract 
workers) and higher living costs (to travel to and from distant workplaces). To 
stay close to their workers (and customers) who cannot afford long commutes, 
small formal metal producers in Dar es Salaam and Addis Ababa prefer to risk 
ﬁ nes for operating workshops encroaching on the sidewalks or in crammed 
compounds rather than relocate to larger factories in peripheral areas, which 
lack affordable residential space and good transport. And with trafﬁ c conges-
tion, commuting shortens working hours. 
Worker housing is also a problem in Vietnam, but public transport allows 
large numbers of workers to commute over fairly long distances to reach even 
the larger industrial parks on the periphery of Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. 
China’s state enterprises have a long history of building housing in or adja-
cent to factory compounds. Despite large-scale privatization of urban hous-
ing beginning in the 1990s, local governments often build housing adjacent to 
factory sites to accommodate migrant workers, even in less prosperous inland 
provinces such as Jiangxi. Equipped with the basic amenities, hostels are often 
free for employees. The proximity to work saves transport costs. This policy 
helps to contain wage pressures and allows ﬁ rms to compete on low proﬁ t mar-
gins.4 It also allows workers to save a very high proportion of their wages, which 
they often use later as capital to open new businesses. Large-scale migration of 
workers, which has moved millions of Chinese far from their original homes, 
often involves lengthy family separations. In China, workers willingly shoulder 
the burden of these social costs in pursuit of higher incomes.
Marketing of Goods: Land for Warehousing, Showrooms, 
and Trading Inputs and Outputs 
The qualitative interviews show that few small and medium enterprises in Sub-
Saharan Africa have access to land for business transactions. Without storage 
space, owners purchase inputs at retail rather than wholesale prices. Even in one 
of Addis Ababa’s wood clusters on government-allocated land, the 35 smaller
=== PAGE 91 ===
INDUSTRIAL LAND 
 
71
ﬁ rms are unable to ﬁ nd an individual or common storage facility. The same con-
straint for grain-milling ﬁ rms leads to high spoilage rates due to mice and rain. 
The paucity of showroom space forces small producers to manufacture prod-
ucts only on order. Showrooms would facilitate information sharing between 
customers and producers on variety, quality, fashions, and designs. But in Sub-
Saharan Africa’s small and medium enterprises, customers can choose only from 
photographs of products made for someone else. To obtain new orders, produc-
ers rely mostly on repeat customers and word-of-mouth references. 
Sub-Saharan Africa’s producers do not have easy access to a variety of high-
quality inputs and cannot readily purchase large volumes of raw material to 
satisfy large and time-sensitive orders. The absence of input markets raises the 
cost of information and search and undermines customer-seller relationships 
that evolve through frequent interactions and facilitate the delivery of large 
orders on time. 
These are exactly the sort of difﬁ culties that development-oriented local 
Chinese governments have addressed with great vigor. Previously cited exam-
ples in Yiwu, Zhejiang Province (see Ding 2010) and Xinji, Hebei Province (see 
Blecher and Shue 2001) could be replicated many times over. They show that 
local governments identiﬁ ed opportunities for proﬁ table expansion, pushed 
local businesses to adopt measures needed to grasp such opportunities, con-
structed suitable facilities, and provided (or arranged to obtain) suitable infor-
mation and advice. 
A Possible Solution from Asia 
This section considers possible solutions from China’s plug-and-play industrial 
parks and Africa’s experience so far with these parks.
China’s Plug-and-Play Industrial Parks Catering to Small 
and Large Enterprises 
Many studies have documented the contributions of China’s coastal special eco-
nomic zones as platforms for attracting export-driven foreign direct investment 
and as testing grounds for key reforms. The Shenzhen Special Economic Zone 
next to Hong Kong SAR, China, transformed a ﬁ shing village into a leading 
global city of 8 million people in less than 30 years. China’s smaller industrial 
parks are less well known, but they too have contributed substantially to the 
nation’s astonishing industrial development. 
China has more than 1,000 industrial parks driven by a central government 
policy encouraging their development. Many cities and counties have emulated 
the large zones of the central and provincial governments. Local governments
=== PAGE 92 ===
72 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
develop industrial parks to spur local growth and increase tax revenues (Li and 
Zhou 2005). The parks have enabled many small and medium Chinese enter-
prises to grow from family operations focused on domestic markets into global 
powerhouses. But not all Chinese industrial parks have been successful; the 
better ones were built on existing or potential industrial strengths—in other 
words, on local comparative advantage.
China’s successful industrial parks provide enterprises with security, good 
basic infrastructure (roads, energy, water, sewers), streamlined government 
regulations (through government service centers), and affordable industrial 
land. They also provide technical training, low-cost standardized factory shells, 
and free and decent housing for workers next to the plants. By helping small 
Chinese enterprises to grow into medium and large enterprises, the country 
has avoided a shortage of medium ﬁ rms—the “missing middle”—evident in 
most Sub-Saharan countries. China’s parks focus on speciﬁ c industries, such as 
leather and textiles in Nanchang, furniture in Ji’an, and electronics in Ganzhou 
(for further examples, see Zeng 2008; Sonobe and Otsuka 2006; Sonobe, Hu, 
and Otsuka 2002).
More advanced industrial parks offer market analysis, accounting, import 
and export information, and management advice and help ﬁ rms to recruit and 
train workers. For example, parks near the Yangtze River delta place a strong 
emphasis on helping ﬁ rms to get business licenses and hire workers. Parks may 
also have facilities to address environmental challenges. 
The plug-and-play industrial parks have greatly reduced start-up costs and 
risks for small and medium enterprises that have sufﬁ cient scale, capital, and 
growth prospects to take advantage of larger facilities at a phase in their devel-
opment when they are unable to obtain bank loans. They have also facilitated 
industrial clusters, generating substantial spillovers as well as economies of scale 
and scope for Chinese industries. The clusters are facilitated further by govern-
ment support for input and output markets. 
In a nutshell, Chinese governments, especially at the local level and particu-
larly in the central and southeastern coastal provinces, have taken the initia-
tive and moved energetically to foster the development of small and medium 
enterprises by providing public goods and market information about suppliers 
and buyers rather than large-scale subsidies. Gradual reforms have pushed the 
cost of energy and utilities in the direction of market prices; ﬁ rms that fail to 
pay their bills cannot expect to have continued access to electricity and other 
utilities. Competition is intense among ﬁ rms in light manufacturing (and in 
many other sectors of China’s economy). China’s economic reforms have vastly 
reduced opportunities for failing ﬁ rms, especially small and medium opera-
tions, to receive government bailouts. China now has several hundred million 
migrant workers, with the largest ﬂ ow of migrants from west to east. China’s 
coastal cities have become magnets for millions of migrant workers, many of
=== PAGE 93 ===
INDUSTRIAL LAND 
 
73
whom live and work in various types of special zones and industrial parks. The 
design and operation of these zones and parks facilitates employers’ access to 
large numbers of workers and contributes to the migrants’ efforts to achieve 
their own goals of upward mobility through hard work and diligent saving. 
Many Chinese migrants remit substantial funds to their original homes to 
support parents, spouses, and children left behind, to build new housing, and 
sometimes to support future business plans. 
In Africa, by contrast, workers spend the bulk of their incomes on housing, 
food, and transport and achieve much lower savings rates than their Chinese 
counterparts. Reforming legal and administrative provisions that limit access 
to land, especially industrial plots connected to utilities and convenient trans-
portation, will encourage the growth of manufacturing enterprises that can 
raise the productivity, and hence the wages, of large numbers of workers. In this 
way, growing numbers of low-income Africans can begin to access the sort of 
beneﬁ ts that have improved the lives and prospects of many millions of Chinese 
workers during the past several decades of reform.
Policy Recommendations for Africa 
African governments should develop such plug-and-play industrial parks next 
to main cities and ports. This would eliminate in one stroke the very high inland 
transport costs for exporters in Africa. 
As in China, industrial parks can bypass difﬁ cult land reform, which can 
take years. African governments can test a variety of policies before gradually 
applying them more widely. The demonstration effects can overcome political 
economy constraints. 
But industrial zones are not new to Africa. Why have they failed (box 3.1), 
and why would they work now? 
B OX 3.1
Why Have Industrial Parks Failed in Africa? 
Industrial parks have played a catalytic role in facilitating industrial upgrading and 
export-led growth in East Asia, most notably in “tiger economies” during the 1980s 
and in China since the early 1990s, but also in Latin America and parts of South Asia. 
The African experience with industrial parks over the past two decades, which has 
mostly involved traditional export-processing zones, has been less spectacular. With 
the signiﬁ cant exception of Mauritius and the partial (initial) success of Kenya, Mada-
gascar, and Lesotho, most African zones have failed to attract signiﬁ cant investment,
=== PAGE 94 ===
74 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
promote exports, or create sustainable employment. Only Mauritius has used industrial 
parks as an effective vehicle to support economic transformation.
While many factors that contributed to the failure of individual zones are very spe-
ciﬁ c, some have held back the potential of industrial parks across Africa:
• Poor strategic planning: a mismatch with comparative advantage. One of the strik-
ing features of many zones in Africa is that the few investors they have managed to 
attract are spread across a wide range of manufacturing sectors. This contrasts with 
hugely successful Asian examples like the Hsinchu Science and Industrial Park in Tai-
wan, China (see Hsueh, Hsu, and Perkins 2001; Amsden and Chu 2003) that set out 
to build industry clusters. One of the reasons is that many zones have been initiated 
without careful studies of market demand or strategic planning. They are poorly 
targeted (often at sectors well outside the country’s comparative advantage), and 
few have been integrated into their country’s broader economic policy framework.
• Poor choice of location. Zone location is determined too often by political rather 
than commercial or economic considerations. Rather than co-locating zones with 
key gateway infrastructure, many countries have attempted to locate at least one 
zone in a “lagging” or remote region. And few have done enough to address the 
infrastructure connectivity, labor skills, and supplies that these regions lack. 
• Insufﬁ cient investment in infrastructure. Some African zones offer infrastructure 
inside the zones that, while usually not world class, is of higher quality than is 
typically available in the domestic economy. But infrastructure in many zones mir-
rors the worst domestic experiences, including water shortages, electricity outages, 
and health, safety, and environmental shortfalls. Zones that lack even basic internal 
infrastructure have little chance of success. Moreover, in many cases infrastructure 
stops at the zone gates, with investors having to deal with poor roads, port-related 
delays, and little access to social infrastructure. 
• Poor implementation capacity and lack of authority. The authorities responsible 
for developing, promoting, and regulating African special economic zones often 
lack resources as well as the institutional authority and implementation capacity to 
carry out their mandates. The resulting confusion in procedures and controls—most 
notably in customs administration—undermines the competitiveness of many Afri-
can industrial parks.
• Lack of high-level support and policy stability. Many African countries have shown 
only a half-hearted commitment to zones, passing zone laws but not implementing 
regulations or providing adequate resources for management, infrastructure, and 
promotion. Fundamental “rules of the game” often change from year to year, and 
many programs have suffered from poor coordination of trade policy and a failure to 
establish a policy environment that offers investors transparency and predictability. 
In addition, African industrial parks may be lagging because of poor timing. The 
rapid growth of industrial parks on a global basis and their success in contributing to 
export-led growth beneﬁ ted from an unprecedented era of globalization in the 1980s 
and 1990s and the rise of global production networks. But African countries, most of 
which only launched programs well into the 1990s and 2000s, face a much more com-
petitive environment, with the emergence and entrenchment of “factory Asia,” the 
expiration of the Multiﬁ ber Arrangement, the consolidation of production networks,
=== PAGE 95 ===
INDUSTRIAL LAND 
 
75
and the recent slowdown in demand in traditional export markets. Some countries 
may have developed the wrong zone model at the wrong time. 
Source: Farole 2011.
Note: Lesotho does not have a zone program, but it does combine the same policy instruments to sup-
port export manufacturers, including a special ﬁ scal and administrative regime along with public provi-
sion of industrial infrastructure. 
Notes 
 1. While China did experience some land issues, particularly at the local levels regard-
ing the compensation paid to farmers for their land, these issues were relatively small 
compared to the progress made in making industrial land available to entrepreneurs.
 2. For a review of policies, investment incentives, and performance of policy in support 
of the development of the manufacturing industry in Vietnam, see Le (2010). 
 3. Around 1998 the government designed special ﬁ scal incentives for new and exist-
ing ﬁ rms to locate in remote land development projects for ethnic minority areas, 
mountain areas, islands, and other underdeveloped areas. A preferential system was 
set up to assist domestic investors by allotting or renting land according to land 
legislation and building the industrial zone’s infrastructure for renting them. After 
1998 domestic investors also beneﬁ ted from reductions in the land use tax. 
 4. In both Vietnam and China most ﬁ rm owners also provide free meals. While this is 
an innovative solution to one of the leading constraints on ﬁ rm expansion, hostels 
that separate the worker from the family for long periods have high social costs. 
Unless this model is adapted to the local socioeconomic conditions, policy makers 
and workers in countries with different political systems and beliefs may have reser-
vations about it. 
References 
Amsden, Alice H., and Wan-wen Chu. 2003. Beyond Late Development: Taiwan’s Upgrad-
ing Policies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blecher, Marc, and Vivienne Shue. 2001. “Into Leather: State-Led Development and the 
Private Sector in Xinji.” China Quarterly 166 (2001): 368–93.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1993. “Productivity and the Density of Economic 
Activity.” American Economic Review 86 (1): 54–70.
Ding, Ke. 2010. “The Role of the Specialized Markets in Upgrading Industrial Clusters in 
China.” In From Agglomeration to Innovation: Upgrading Industrial Clusters in Emerg-
ing Economies, ed. Akifumi Kuchiki and Masatsugu Tsuji, 270–89. Houndmills, U.K.: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Dollar, David, Mary Hallaward-Driemeier, and Taye Mengistae. 2004. “Investment Climate 
and International Integration.” Working Paper 3323, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fan, C. Cindy, and Allen Scott, 2003. “Industrial Agglomeration and Development: A 
Survey of Spatial Economic Issues in East Asia and a Statistical Analysis of Chinese 
Regions.” Economic Geography 79 (3): 295–319.
Farole, Thomas. 2011. “Special Economic Zones in Africa.” Poverty Reduction and Eco-
nomic Management, International Trade, World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 96 ===
76 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
Hausman, Warren H., Hau L. Lee, and Uma Subramanian. 2005. “Global Logistics 
Indicators, Supply Chain Metrics, and Bilateral Trade Patterns.” World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper 3773, Washington, DC. 
He, Canfei, Yehua Dennis Wei, and Xiuzhen Xie. 2008. “Globalization, Institutional 
Change, and Industrial Location: Economic Transition and Industrial Concentration 
in China.” Regional Studies 42 (7): 923–45. 
He, Canfei, and Junsong Wang. 2010. “Spatial Restructuring of Chinese Manufacturing 
Industries and the Productivity Effects of Industrial Agglomerations.” Background 
Paper for Innovation Policy Note, ed. Hamid Alavi. College of Urban and Environ-
mental Science, Peking University; Peking-Lincoln Institute Center for Urban Devel-
opment and Land Policy. 
He, Canfei, and Shengjun Zhu. 2007. “Economic Transition and Regional Industrial 
Restructuring in China: Structural Convergence or Divergence?” Post Communist 
Economics 19 (3): 321–46. 
Hsueh, Li-min, Chen-kuo Hsu, and Dwight H. Perkins, eds. 2001. Industrialization and 
the State: The Changing Role of the Taiwan Government in the Economy, 1945–1998. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lall, Sanjaya. 2004. Reinventing Industrial Strategy: The Role of Government Policy in 
Building Industrial Competitiveness. G-24 Discussion Paper Series 28. United Nations, 
New York.
Le, Duy Binh. 2010. “Review of Policies and Investment Incentives: Performance of Pol-
icy in Support of the Development of the Manufacturing Industry in Vietnam.” World 
Bank, Hanoi. 
Lee, Yung Joon, and Hyoungsoo Zang. 1998. “Urbanization and Regional Productivity 
in Korean Manufacturing.” Urban Studies 35 (11): 2085–99.
Li, Hongbin, and Li-An Zhou. 2005. “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: 
The Incentive Role of Personnel Control in China.” Journal of Public Economics 89 
(9/10): 1743–62.
Limão, Nuno, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvan-
tage, Transport Costs, and Trade.” World Bank Economic Review 15 (3): 451–79.
Pan, Zuohong, and Fan Zhang. 2002. “Urban Productivity in China.” Urban Studies 39 
(12): 2267–81.
Sonobe, Tetsushi, D. Hu, and Keijiro Otsuka. 2002. “Process of Cluster Formation in 
China: A Case Study of a Garment Town.” Journal of Development Studies 39 (1): 
118–39.
Sonobe, Tetsushi, and Keijiro Otsuka. 2006. “The Division of Labor and the Formation 
of Industrial Clusters in Taiwan.” Review of Development Economics 10 (1): 71–86.
Wang, Jici. 2001. Innovative Space: Industrial Cluster and Regional Development. Beijing: 
Peking University Press.
Zeng, Douglas. 2008. “Innovation and Cluster Development in China.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC. http://www.clusteringconference.com/html/TR/sunumlar
/Session%20V/P2-Dougles%20Z.%20Zeng%20(Session5).pdf.
=== PAGE 97 ===
Chapter 4
The main source of ﬁ nancing is retained earnings in all ﬁ ve study countries, and 
the need for capital investments is relatively small in light manufacturing. But 
access to ﬁ nance is an important constraint across all light manufacturing sec-
tors, especially for small and medium enterprises. All ﬁ rms require additional 
resources to invest in technology, improve buildings, and buy new land. The 
high cost of formal ﬁ nance is driven in part by difﬁ culties in using assets as col-
lateral, especially for ﬁ rms in agribusiness, because formal banks will not accept 
agricultural produce or livestock as collateral. 
Access to Finance and Firm Performance 
Financial access variables have a signiﬁ cant effect on ﬁ rm growth. With other 
factors held constant, having a loan or overdraft facility increases the growth in a 
ﬁ rm’s number of permanent employees by 3.1 percent, being credit constrained 
reduces a ﬁ rm’s employment growth by 1.9 percent, having sales credit increases 
a ﬁ rm’s growth by 2.6 percent, and having external investment funds increases 
growth by 4.2 percent.1 These strong results show that access to ﬁ nance indeed 
matters for ﬁ rm growth.
But there is a difference in the start-up and operating phases of a ﬁ rm. Start-
up ﬁ nance for ﬁ rms in light manufacturing is, in the vast majority of cases, from 
own savings, friends, and family. In China many small and medium enterprises 
revealed that they used savings from migrant work to start their operations. Lit-
tle evidence was found that formal sources of ﬁ nance are signiﬁ cant at the start-
up phase. Formal bank ﬁ nance becomes important when a micro or small ﬁ rm 
wants to expand, upgrade technology, or increase production. In Sub-Saharan 
Africa ﬁ rms have to ﬁ nd signiﬁ cant up-front capital to buy land, build factory 
premises, and invest in machinery. The cost of ﬁ nance and the requirement for 
collateral prevent them from getting loans to ﬁ nance expansion. 
When we consider the transformation of successful small ﬁ rms into medium 
or large ﬁ rms, lack of formal ﬁ nancing options is a key constraint in Sub- Saharan 
Africa. Difﬁ culties in accessing ﬁ nance can contribute to the “missing middle” 
phenomenon, leaving small enterprises trapped in low technology and low pro-
Finance
=== PAGE 98 ===
78 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
ductivity, without the means to upgrade skills and technology. Low ﬁ nancial 
sector development affects ﬁ rm size and skews the distribution toward small 
and medium ﬁ rms, especially among ﬁ rms that perceive access to ﬁ nance as an 
obstacle (Dinh, Mavridis, and Nguyen 2010). 
Our quantitative survey asked ﬁ rms whether they could borrow from vari-
ous sources to purchase additional machinery, equipment, or vehicles. In China 
and Vietnam, around 35 percent of ﬁ rms said they could borrow from a bank, 
but only 8 percent of small and medium enterprises reported this for Ethio-
pia. In contrast, 60 percent of small and medium enterprises in Tanzania and 
32 percent of those in Zambia reported that they could borrow from a bank 
(table 4.1). But this is contrary to data showing that only 4 percent of ﬁ rms in 
Tanzania and 3 percent in Zambia actually borrowed from a bank. Why have 
small and medium enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa not used bank ﬁ nance, 
even when they perceive that it is available to them?
The Availability and Cost of Finance 
More than 80 percent of small and medium enterprises surveyed used retained 
earnings to ﬁ nance their last purchase of machinery and equipment (table 4.2). 
This conﬁ rms the recurring response in qualitative interviews that own savings 
for the most part ﬁ nanced ﬁ rm expansion. But as ﬁ rms grow, they use more 
diverse sources, especially in China.
For innovations in new products, production processes, or delivery systems, 
the quantitative survey indicates that in all countries except China, small and 
medium enterprises require additional ﬁ nance. After retained earnings, the 
main source of ﬁ nancing for innovation is friends and relatives (table 4.3), cited 
twice as often by Asian as by African respondents. Banks are cited by a minority 
of respondents, but more frequently by Asian than by African ﬁ rms (19 percent 
for China, 1–11 percent for Sub-Saharan Africa). New capital from existing 
Table 4.1 Percentage of Firms That Could Borrow to Purchase Additional Machinery, 
Equipment, or Vehicles in the Five Countries, by Source
Source 
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Bank
 36
 34
  8
 60
 32
Nonbank ﬁ nancial institution
 10
  1
 45
 12
 20
Government agency
  0
  1
  7
  3
 12
Family or friends
 11
 22
  4
  5
  9
Moneylender
  1
  4
  0
  4
  1
Other
  0
  0
  0
  0
  7
Number of observations
303
300
250
262
263
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011.
=== PAGE 99 ===
FINANCE 
 
79
owners is also cited on average more often by Asian respondents. In addition, 
Chinese respondents mention advances from customers and credit from ﬁ nan-
cial institutions as signiﬁ cant sources, largely omitted by other respondents. 
Generally, participation in the formal ﬁ nancial system is higher among ﬁ rms 
in China. To access formal bank ﬁ nance, the ﬁ rm needs to establish a relationship 
before lending through a bank account. Smaller Chinese ﬁ rms are substantially 
more likely to have a bank account than ﬁ rms in other countries (table 4.4).2 
Table 4.2 Source of Funding for the Purchase of Machinery, Equipment, or Vehicles in the 
Five Countries
% of firms
Source
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Internal funds or retained earnings
80
82
88
80
86
Bank 
23
18
2
4
3
Nonbank ﬁ nancial institution 
7
2
10
2
1
Government agency 
0
0
0
0
0
Family or friends
7
18
4
3
1
Hire-purchase or credit from the equipment 
 supplier
5
1
0
0
0
Other
0
1
3
1
8
Number of observations
265
300
250
262
250
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011. 
Table 4.3 Source of Funding for Innovation in the Five Countries
% of firms 
Source
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Retained earnings
55
87
88
47
79
Friends and relatives
16
16
6
8
8
Bank
19
16
4
11
1
New capital from owners
12
9
9
2
5
Customers
14
4
9
6
3
Financial institution
23
1
7
0
2
Raw material supplier
4
8
2
0
0
New owners
4
1
0
0
0
Domestic joint venture
3
0
0
0
0
Equipment supplier
3
0
0
0
0
Government agency
1
0
0
0
0
Foreign joint venture
0
1
0
0
0
Development agency
0
0
0
0
0
Other
0
0
2
0
5
Number of observations
73
121
113
66
99
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011.
=== PAGE 100 ===
80 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Firms in China and Vietnam borrow mostly from banks, but Chinese ﬁ rms 
also obtain formal ﬁ nancing through nonbank ﬁ nancial institutions and gov-
ernment agencies. Very few ﬁ rms in Tanzania and Zambia borrow, indicating 
that formal lending sources fail to meet the needs of small and medium enter-
prises in those countries. 
Among ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan Africa that do borrow, the costs and collat-
eral requirements are signiﬁ cantly higher than for their counterparts in Asia. 
Small and medium enterprises in our quantitative survey pay an average annual 
interest rate of about 4.7 percent in China, compared with about 10 percent in 
Ethiopia, 14 percent in Vietnam and Tanzania, and 21 percent in Zambia. Firms 
reported that 173 percent of the loan amount is required as collateral in Ethio-
pia (2006), 146 percent in Zambia (2007), and 124 percent in Tanzania (2006). 
This proportion was 88 percent in China (2003). 
Working capital allows small and medium enterprises to take on bigger 
orders, be more responsive to customers, and remain liquid. Among ﬁ rms with 
an account, few have an overdraft facility outside China. In Vietnam and Ethio-
pia only a handful of manufacturing ﬁ rms have an overdraft facility, rising to 6 
percent in Tanzania, 19 percent in Zambia, and 63 percent in China. 
Overdraft facilities appear to help Chinese manufacturing ﬁ rms to obtain 
short-term ﬁ nance at a median annual interest rate of 7.5 percent. Only about 
20 percent of the ﬁ rms said they are required to provide collateral (the median 
collateral is 65 percent of the value of the overdraft facility).3 
Why Is the Cost of Formal Finance So High 
and the Availability So Constricted? 
There are a number of reasons for the high cost and limited availability of 
ﬁ nance in Sub-Saharan Africa, including issues of risk, weak asset markets, and 
low savings rates, which are discussed in detail below.
Table 4.4 Percentage of Firms That Have Borrowed in the Five Countries, by Source, 2006–10
Source 
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Bank
33
36
4
3
3
Nonbank ﬁ nancial institutions
15
4
32
2
4
Government agency
12
2
0
0
1
Family or friends
15
19
18
2
3
Moneylender
0
5
0
0
1
Other
0
0
6
0
1
Number of observations
303
300
250
262
263
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011.
=== PAGE 101 ===
FINANCE 
 
81
High Risk 
The risks associated with operating a light manufacturing business in Sub-
Saharan Africa are very high, as shown by the constraints discussed in this book. 
For these very reasons, banks will not lend to ﬁ rms and sectors in which risks 
are too high and proﬁ ts are too low. Moreover, the low savings rate and distor-
tions in the credit market increase the costs of ﬁ nance and restrict access to 
formal ﬁ nance. The costs are elevated due to information asymmetries (lack of 
credit registries), market uncertainty (dependence on imported inputs, macro-
economic and political environment, weak infrastructure), and the risk of ﬁ rm 
failure (weak entrepreneurial skills, poor market access, access to new technol-
ogy). The competitive weakness of most small and informal ﬁ rms also makes it 
difﬁ cult for banks to assess creditworthiness.
Weak Asset Markets 
A major barrier for young ﬁ rms seeking to access ﬁ nance is the higher collateral 
requirement for loans in Africa than in China. Although small and medium 
ﬁ rms in China rarely receive direct ﬁ nancing from government, ofﬁ cial efforts 
to provide factory shells and access to land in industrial zones allow successful 
ﬁ rms to expand without bearing the time and expense needed to build their 
own factory; such arrangements allow growing ﬁ rms to conserve funds that 
may then be used as collateral to obtain loans. In addition, recent policy initia-
tives may have begun to erode long-standing barriers that effectively deny bank 
credit to most small and medium enterprises. 
Land policy in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia makes it is difﬁ cult for banks 
to accept land as collateral. In Ethiopia the government has stipulated that land 
can be sold only if it has been “developed,” meaning that the owner must build 
a structure on the land. In addition, banks do not consider the viability and 
track record of a business in assessing a loan application. Although the leasing 
of machinery is allowed by law, banks do not accept machinery as collateral. 
Even controlling for ﬁ rm size, Chinese ﬁ rms face substantially lower average 
collateral requirements than their counterparts in Tanzania and Zambia (ﬁ g-
ure 4.1). As shown in the interviews, the cost of ﬁ nance is rarely the issue. The 
problem is the difﬁ culty of using land or assets as collateral. Small and medium 
enterprises in China are better able to obtain formal ﬁ nance than ﬁ rms in Africa 
because the requirement for collateral is lower.
This advantage is evident in agroprocessing. The barriers to small Ethio-
pian dairy farmers using land or livestock as collateral reduce their ability to 
upgrade production technology or compete even domestically. The prohibitive 
cost and low access to ﬁ nance prevent farmers from upgrading their cattle to 
high-yielding cross-breeds, and the use of low-yield cattle further undermines 
their ability to compete.
=== PAGE 102 ===
82 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Low Savings Rates 
Gross domestic savings have been consistently higher in China (50 percent of 
gross domestic product [GDP]) than in Vietnam (30 percent) and Sub-Saharan 
comparators (20 percent; ﬁ gure 4.2). Low domestic savings limit the availability 
of capital for private investment. Some would argue that a low savings rate is a 
binding constraint on private sector growth. Although the correlation between 
these two factors is strong, the direction of causality is debatable. As economies 
grow, individual and national incomes rise, the proportion of income needed for 
immediate consumption falls, and domestic savings rates are likely to increase. 
Possible Solutions from Asia 
Banks rarely lend to a ﬁ rm without some form of guarantee or collateral. 
Because of the difﬁ culties in buying and selling land, banks in Sub-Saharan 
Africa do not accept land as collateral. As mentioned, the government of Ethio-
pia has stipulated that land can be sold only if it has been “developed.” But 
Figure 4.1 Collateral Requirements in the Five Countries
% providing collateral
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
2
4
log (regular workers)
6
8
Vietnam
Tanzania
China
Ethiopia
Zambia
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011.
=== PAGE 103 ===
FINANCE 
 
83
there is uncertainty over what “developed” means in practice, and banks often 
refuse to accept agricultural land as collateral. Since banks also decline to allow 
farmers to offer cattle as collateral, Ethiopian bank policy effectively restricts 
the expansion of dairy farming and milk processing. Land reforms have the 
potential to free up the access of private ﬁ rms to long-term leases for industrial 
and agricultural land; they could also encourage the formalization of rental 
arrangements to facilitate the use of land as collateral against bank loans. 
Support to nonbank ﬁ nancial institutions could increase the use of leas-
ing, factoring, and other products by enterprises, especially small and medium 
enterprises, in the absence of a developed ﬁ nancial system (see Beck and 
 Demirgüç-Kunt 2006). Leasing is a useful tool for upgrading equipment with-
out collateral or guarantees. A legal and institutional framework needs to be in 
place to support the establishment of leasing and factoring companies.
The limited second-hand market for machinery in many Sub-Saharan Afri-
can economies reduces the viability of banks using machinery as collateral. The 
government could step in to provide modest incentives for banks and other 
ﬁ nancial institutions to offer ﬁ nancing for machinery to well-managed ﬁ rms. 
Figure 4.2 Gross Domestic Savings as a Percentage of GDP in the Five Countries, 1985–2009
gross domestic savings (% of GDP)
–10
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
China
Sub-Saharan Africa (all income levels)
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Sources: World Development Indicators and Global Development Finance databases, various years.
=== PAGE 104 ===
84 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
As the industry grows, the market for second-hand machinery will expand, 
making its use as collateral more efﬁ cient.
Recent analysis of the role of clustering in manufacturing development in 
China highlights the positive effects of clustering for access to ﬁ nance (Long 
and Zhang 2011). First, this production model involves many small ﬁ rms and 
a high division of labor, rather than large ﬁ rms that integrate all stages of pro-
duction. This structure reduces the capital investment required for each ﬁ rm to 
operate. Individual ﬁ rms still face ﬁ nancial constraints, but the required capital 
is lower. Second, in the early stages of China’s development, small ﬁ rms did not 
use formal ﬁ nance. The cluster structure created social capital, which supported 
trade credit and informal ﬁ nance. 
The positive spillovers from improving access to ﬁ nance for small and 
medium enterprises in light manufacturing provide more justiﬁ cation for gov-
ernment to support both industrial clusters for small ﬁ rms and industrial parks 
for larger ﬁ rms (see chapter 3).
Notes
 1. If we include all of these signiﬁ cant ﬁ nancial access variables in one model after 
controlling for ﬁ rm characteristics, they still have signiﬁ cant effects on employment 
growth, although the effects are smaller. And if we use the same model and run the 
regressions in different regions, the signiﬁ cance and signs of the effects remain the 
same (Dinh, Mavridis, and Nguyen 2010).
 2. Asian ﬁ rms are, on average, 10 percentage points more likely to have an account.
 3. But nonresponse may be an issue. Of the 160 Chinese ﬁ rms reporting an overdraft, 
only 119 answered the question about collateral and only 68 answered the question 
about the interest rate.
References 
Beck, Thorsten, and Aslı Demirgüç-Kunt. 2006. “Small and Medium-Size Enterprises: 
Access to Finance as a Growth Constraint.” Journal of Banking and Finance 30 (11): 
2931–43.
Dinh, Hinh T., Dimitris Mavridis, and Hoa B. Nguyen. 2010. “The Binding Constraint 
on Firms’ Growth in Developing Countries.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing 
in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africa
manufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Simon Quinn. 2011. “Results from a Qualitative Survey.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Long, Cheryl, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. “Cluster-Based Industrialization in China: 
Financing and Performance.” Journal of International Economics 84 (1): 112–23.
=== PAGE 105 ===
Chapter 5
Poor trade logistics penalize ﬁ rms that rely on imported inputs and doubly 
hit exporters (mostly large and medium ﬁ rms in Africa). On average, they add 
roughly a 10 percent production cost penalty across the ﬁ ve subsectors in the 
three African countries (ﬁ gure 5.1). 
Poor trade logistics also cause long and uncertain delays, which are not 
acceptable to most global buyers, especially in the time-sensitive apparel indus-
try. As a result, production in Ethiopia and Tanzania is conﬁ ned mostly to small 
market niches. Ethiopia exports small volumes of low-value products—the free-
on-board (f.o.b.) price for an Ethiopian polo shirt is around US$3.20, much 
lower than the US$5.50 price of an equivalent Chinese polo shirt. The higher 
Chinese f.o.b. price results from higher-quality shirts and the premium that 
global buyers put on China’s capacity to offer greater choice, bigger volumes, 
and shorter and more certain delivery times. Tanzania exports polo shirts at 
an f.o.b. price similar to China’s, but these are small-volume specialty products 
with orders as low as 1,000 pieces per style, not the fairly standard orders of 
15,000–60,000 pieces. The small orders mean higher input costs, lower capacity 
use, and higher overheads.
Why Are Trade Logistics So Important to Competitiveness 
in Light Manufacturing? 
Good trade logistics connect low-income countries to global output and input 
markets. Both China and Vietnam have built their export sectors on the back of 
very good trade logistics; establishing industrial export zones next to efﬁ cient 
ports greatly aided their efforts to expand the sale of manufactures to overseas 
markets. 
But in Africa poor trade logistics increase production costs (in most cases 
wiping out the labor cost advantage) and lead to long and unreliable delivery 
times, which make it extremely difﬁ cult for ﬁ rms to ﬁ ll just-in-time orders. 
Therefore, global buyers are hesitant to place large orders. 
Trade Logistics
=== PAGE 106 ===
86 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Although poor trade logistics can act as natural protection for domestic 
producers selling to domestic and regional markets in Africa, that protection 
is moot for the many products for which most inputs must be imported (see 
chapter 2). Indeed, the cost of importing low volumes of many different types 
of inputs may exceed the cost of importing the ﬁ nal good. Studies have shown 
that most African countries are below the global “efﬁ cient frontier” for apparel 
production, as deﬁ ned by the cost of logistics and labor, although Madagascar 
and Ethiopia are not too far from it (ﬁ gure 5.2). 
Trade Logistics Performance 
According to the World Bank’s Doing Business 2011 (World Bank 2011a), China 
and Vietnam perform especially well on the trading-across-borders indicators, 
which show the cost and time of moving a 20-foot container from the port of 
arrival to the largest business city in the country (excluding ocean travel). China 
ranks 50 among 183 economies, and Vietnam ranks 63 (table 5.1). The cost 
to export and import per container ranges from US$500 in China to US$645 
in Vietnam. But it can be as high as US$1,200 for exports in Tanzania and 
US$3,000 for imports in Ethiopia or Zambia. The time to import and export is 
Figure 5.1 Impact of Poor Trade Logistics on Total Production Costs, by Sector
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011. 
Note: Apparel and leather products do not include the penalty associated with long and uncertain delivery times 
(up to 10 percent of production cost in apparel).
0
5
10
15
20
25
apparel
leather
products
wood
products
metal
products
agribusiness
average
production penalty (%)
=== PAGE 107 ===
TRADE LOGISTICS 
 
87
at least twice as long for Ethiopia and Zambia as it is for China and Vietnam. In 
addition, these data do not reﬂ ect the time for customs procedures at Djibouti 
and Dar es Salaam. Although Tanzania beneﬁ ts from having its own port, it still 
ranks far behind China and Vietnam on trading across borders. 
On the World Bank’s logistics performance index, Tanzania (95), Ethiopia 
(123), and Zambia (138) sit ﬁ rmly in the bottom half of the ranking (155 coun-
tries ranked in the 2011 index) with China at 27 and Vietnam at 53. 
Figure 5.2 Logistics Performance Index and Annual Labor Costs per Worker in Apparel 
Production in Select Countries, 2010
♦
♦South Africa
♦
♦
♦
♦♦
♦
♦
♦
Vietnam
China
Mauritius
Indonesia
Kenya
Ethiopia
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Madagascar
Bangladesh
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
5,000
4,500
annual labor costs per worker (US$)
logistics performance index
Source: Conway and Shah 2010.
Note: Trend line indicates the average, for example, for a given level of logistics performance; countries beyond 
the trend line have above-average labor cost.
Table 5.1 Time and Cost of Trading across Borders in the Five Countries
Country
Cost to import a 
20-foot container 
(US$)
Time to
import
(days)
Cost to export a
20-foot container
(US$)
Time to
export
(days)
Rankinga
Ethiopia
2,993
45
1,890
44
157
Tanzania
1,475
31
1,262
24
109
Zambia
3,315
56
2,664
44
150
Sub-Saharan 
 Africa average
2,492
38
1,962
32
Vietnam
645
21
555
22
 63
China
545
24
500
21
 50
Source: World Bank 2011b. 
a. Ranking among 183 economies on all Doing Business trading-across-borders indicators.
=== PAGE 108 ===
88 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Factors Leading to Poor Trade Logistics in Africa 
Poor trade logistics in Africa result from four broad factors (table 5.2).
Higher Inland Transport Costs 
For Ethiopia and Zambia higher inland transport costs add more than a 2 per-
cent production cost penalty in the apparel sector and a 10-day delay, due to 
longer distances, inadequate transport infrastructure, and a lack of competition 
in the trucking industry (Teravaninthorn and Raballand 2008). Addis Ababa is 
more than 800 kilometers from the port of Djibouti. Zambia’s shortest route to 
the sea is through Zimbabwe to the Mozambican port of Beira. Most Zambian 
import and export trafﬁ c is now handled by the port of Durban, more than 
2,300 kilometers from Lusaka by road. The rehabilitation of the railway between 
Lusaka and Beira and of the Beira port will be essential to alleviating Zambia’s 
trade logistics disadvantage. Longer distances and inadequate transport infra-
structure add a 2 percent production cost penalty for apparel in Ethiopia and 
Zambia. 
Higher Port and Terminal Handling Fees 
Although Ethiopia now enjoys access to the new state-of-the-art Doraleh con-
tainer port at Djibouti, port and terminal handling fees remain high. For Tan-
zania, insufﬁ cient storage capacity, poor container management, and a distorted 
proﬁ t incentive of the container terminal operator (storage charges are a main 
source of revenue) have led to severe congestion at Dar es Salaam. Some ship-
ping companies have reduced the frequency at which their ships stop in Dar es 
Salaam, with one dropping its route altogether. Shorter turnover times (with 
custom reforms) together with the expansion of the Tanga port should alleviate 
congestion. Higher port and terminal handling fees in Africa add a 1 percent 
production cost penalty for apparel.
Table 5.2 Four Main Factors That Impair Trade Logistics in the Five Countries
US$ per 20-foot container
Country
Inland
transportation
Port and
terminal
handling
Customs
clearance
Preparation of
documents and
letters of credit
Total
Ethiopia
1,000
500
340
600
2,440
Tanzania
200
400
250
520
1,370
Zambia
2,300
300
110
280
2,990
Vietnam
230
160
100
110
600
China
120
 80
 70
250
520
Source: World Bank 2011b.
=== PAGE 109 ===
TRADE LOGISTICS 
 
89
Higher Customs Clearance and Technical Control Fees 
Lack of automation and a single customs window result in higher custom fees 
and delays, which further compound the African deﬁ cit in infrastructure by 
reducing the turnover of containers and ships. This adds a production cost 
penalty of a little less than 1 percent for apparel. 
Higher Costs of Document Preparation and Letters of Credit 
Another 2 percent production cost penalty (apparel sector) is incurred because of 
the higher cost of document preparation (including letters of credit). In Ethiopia 
commercial banks charge 3 percent of the value of the shipment on imports and 
a 2 percent advisory fee on exports (compared with less than 1 percent in China). 
The Doing Business indicator probably underestimates the severity of the issue 
because it is based on a very low container value (US$20,000); the value of a 
20-foot container ﬁ lled with 20,000 polo shirts is US$100,000. The World Bank 
is planning a study to understand why letters of credit are so expensive in Africa.
Other Factors 
Other factors, not captured by the Doing Business indicators, add even more to 
trade logistics costs in Africa:
• High cost of foreign exchange. The National Bank of Ethiopia charges a 1.5 
percent foreign exchange commission fee on the dollars needed to import 
the inputs (a 1 percent production cost penalty in apparel). Waiting for 
the National Bank’s authorization can take up to six months when foreign 
exchange is scarce.
• High shipping costs to and from Africa. It costs 60 percent more to ship to the 
United States from Djibouti than from China and about the same to ship to 
Europe, despite the much greater distance from China. One reason is less 
trafﬁ c in Djibouti; another is the monopoly of the state-owned Ethiopian 
shipping line. Higher shipping costs add a 0.5 percent production cost pen-
alty for apparel.
Improving trade logistics is thus a priority for African countries seeking to 
compete in export-oriented light manufacturing. Not only does the 10 percent 
production cost penalty due to poor trade logistics wipe out Africa’s labor cost 
advantage in most sectors, but long and uncertain delays keep African countries 
out of the higher-value time-sensitive segments of light manufacturing. China 
and Vietnam started their light manufacturing journey by establishing good-
practice industrial zones next to efﬁ cient ports. Low-wage African countries 
with easy access to a port should do the same, as this would also beneﬁ t low-
skilled workers in landlocked African countries who would be able to migrate 
to these industrial zones.
=== PAGE 110 ===
90 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Possible Solutions from Asia 
China’s industrial growth beneﬁ ted from a large domestic market for ﬁ rms to 
exploit economies of scale before entering global trade. Vietnam also beneﬁ ted 
from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations market. African governments 
should explore the potential of regional markets to provide the same beneﬁ ts 
for domestic manufacturing ﬁ rms. 
First, African governments should harmonize and improve customs opera-
tions by simplifying procedures and leveraging information technology (see 
de Wulf and Sokol 2005). Delays in customs procedures incur storage costs 
for containers waiting at the border to be cleared. And the delays and uncer-
tainty over time for customs clearance damage the reputation of local ﬁ rms and 
reduce the f.o.b. prices that they can negotiate with global buyers. 
Second, African countries should develop the hard infrastructure (across 
boundaries) to support multimodal systems combining trucking, railways, 
airways, and shipping to improve connectivity and increase competition. This 
would entail rehabilitating the railway line between Addis Ababa and Djibouti 
(planned), expanding the capacity of the port in Dar es Salaam, and rehabilitat-
ing the trade corridors between Lusaka and Nacala. 
Third, African governments need to increase competition among freight 
forwarders, shipping companies, and trucking companies by removing price 
controls and restrictions on foreign direct investment and on cabotage (Tera-
vaninthorn and Raballand 2008).
Fourth, African governments should develop strategic partnerships along 
key trade corridors. For example, the Ethiopian government should develop a 
strategic partnership with Djibouti to optimize port operations and minimize 
charges. Port operations are a key source of revenue for Djibouti, and Ethiopia 
accounts for more than 70 percent of the volume. Djibouti’s future development 
thus depends in part on Ethiopia’s future success in light manufacturing, just as 
the success of Hong Kong SAR, China, relied on China’s. So the new state-of-
the-art container port at Doraleh (managed by Dubai Ports) can be viewed as a 
strategic asset. A good ﬁ rst step is improving the legal framework that regulates 
the services of private port operators; its current inadequacy hampers the efﬁ -
ciency, competitiveness, and quality of service of the Djibouti port. The old fee 
structure for private port operators is not suited to port costs (both the types of 
costs and their amounts), to the new kinds of trafﬁ c, or to the new techniques 
and methods of transport, handling, and management. 
References 
Conway, Patrick, and Manju Shah. 2010. “Incentives, Exports, and International Com-
petitiveness in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from the Apparel Industry.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 111 ===
TRADE LOGISTICS 
 
91
de Wulf, Luc, and José B. Sokol. 2005. Customs Modernization Handbook. World Trade 
and Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
Teravaninthorn, Supee, and Gael Raballand. 2008. Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A 
Review of the Main International Corridors. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2011a. Doing Business 2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011b. Investing Across Borders: Indicators of Foreign Direct Investment; Ethio-
pia. Database. World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 112 ===

=== PAGE 113 ===
Chapter 6
Weak entrepreneurial and worker skills are a binding constraint on the ability to 
improve productivity for small and medium enterprises in several sectors and 
an important constraint for most ﬁ rms. By entrepreneurial skills, we mean the 
managerial and technical skills of the ﬁ rm’s owner or manager. Managerial skills 
ensure that the production process is efﬁ cient and reliable and that the business 
is well known. Technical  skills include the know-how and ability to innovate 
into new products and to improve the quality or change the features of existing 
products in response to shifts in market demand. Productivity is also affected 
by worker skills, especially in the wood sector where the technical skill required 
for efﬁ cient production and high-quality output is greater.
Entrepreneurial Skills 
There is considerable heterogeneity in ﬁ rm performance in Africa, reﬂ ecting 
partly the level of entrepreneurial and management skills and partly the lack 
of competitive pressure in many countries (Clarke 2011b). Inefﬁ cient ﬁ rms are 
not driven from the market, and entrepreneurs ﬁ nd entry difﬁ cult. This is not 
unique to Africa. A study ﬁ nds that one major reason that ﬁ rms in India do not 
adopt better management practice and still exist is the limited competition in 
the domestic market (Bloom and others 2011). A 50 percent tariff on textile 
imports allows inefﬁ cient ﬁ rms to survive against Chinese imports, resulting 
in an equilibrium with low productivity, low wages, small ﬁ rms, and widely 
dispersed ﬁ rm productivity (Bloom and others 2011; see also Lewis 2005; Bar-
telsman and Doms 2000; Hsieh and Klenow 2009).
Gaps between the least and most productive African ﬁ rms are very large. 
In Tanzania ﬁ rms at the twenty-ﬁ fth percentile in labor productivity produce 
about US$1,250 of output for each worker. Firms at the seventy-ﬁ fth percen-
tile produce about US$9,050 per worker—about seven times more. In Zambia 
manufacturing microenterprises at the seventy-ﬁ fth percentile produce about 
US$2,000 of output per worker—about four times more than microenterprises 
at the twenty-ﬁ fth percentile (Clarke 2011b; Conway and Shah 2010). Although 
Skills
=== PAGE 114 ===
94 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
the comparisons are for labor productivity, similar dispersions are evident for 
total factor productivity. 
Large variations in productivity within narrowly deﬁ ned industries arise 
from multiple factors: limited dispersion of entrepreneurial and technical skills, 
market segmentation arising from policy interventions (for example, tariffs or 
entry restrictions) or geography (for example, poor roads), and limited com-
petitive pressure. The consequences are visible in the gap between the free- on-
board (f.o.b.) prices for comparable products earned by Ethiopian and Chi-
nese exporters. The f.o.b. price of Chinese-made polo shirts is approximately 
US$5.38–US$5.80, substantially higher than the f.o.b. price of Ethiopian-made 
polo shirts, which fetch no more than US$2.95–US$3.41, with the difference 
reﬂ ecting both the physical quality and ﬁ nish of the product and the capability 
of the producing ﬁ rm to provide other characteristics (delivery time, reliability) 
valued by the buyers. Against 5 percent production waste in best-practice ﬁ rms 
in China, best-practice ﬁ rms in Ethiopia have 10 percent waste. For wooden 
chair production in Zambia, production waste in converting lumber into a chair 
is 15–30 percent, compared with 10 percent for Chinese ﬁ rms. These differences 
in the production process (not related to costs, inputs, or output markets) can 
be attributed to weak entrepreneurial management and technical skills.
Low Level of Education 
Our survey of small ﬁ rms found big cross-country differences in the education 
of ﬁ rm owners (ﬁ gure 6.1). In Tanzania, 70 percent of the owners have at most 
six years of education—that is, they have completed primary school or less. But 
in Vietnam fewer than 5 percent of owners have only a primary education. In 
China and Vietnam, nearly 90 percent of owners have more than some second-
ary education, but in Tanzania, only 20 percent. 
Possible Solutions from Asia 
These variations reﬂ ect national differences in access to education. In China, 
for example, the expansion of education meant that by around 1990 nearly all 
school-age children completed primary school; by 2000, nearly all young Chinese 
completed junior high school. Recent years have brought rapid expansion in the 
proportion of youths attending high school. While the educational qualiﬁ cations 
of African workers will not match China’s achievements for some decades, pro-
ductivity in light manufacturing can be raised in the short term by increasing the 
skills of entrepreneurs (through managerial training and technical assistance) 
and facilitating the positive spillovers of establishing a competitive manufactur-
ing sector (through support to ﬁ rst movers and foreign direct investment). In 
the two Asian countries, most respondents list family members and relatives as 
contributors of ideas, technical expertise, and ﬁ nancing. The proportions are 
much smaller in Africa, especially for technical expertise and ﬁ nancing.
=== PAGE 115 ===
SKILLS 
 
95
Does this mean that African entrepreneurs ﬁ nd the ideas, expertise, and 
funding they need elsewhere? No. Respondents in the three African countries 
are much more likely to report that no one other than themselves contributed to 
the creation of the ﬁ rm. Furthermore, respondents in Asian ﬁ rms are also more 
likely to list other sources of help, particularly among Chinese respondents who 
are much more likely to list business acquaintances, experts, consultants, clients, 
employees, and equipment suppliers as sources of assistance at start-up. 
Reﬂ ecting China’s legacy of institutions developed during several decades of 
Soviet-inspired economic planning, government agencies and research institu-
tions provide more technical expertise in China than in the other countries; 
following more than three decades of incoming foreign investments, Chinese 
respondents are also more likely than ﬁ rms in other countries to beneﬁ t from 
the technical expertise of foreign joint ventures. Customers tend to be cited 
more often as a source of technical expertise in China and Vietnam than in the 
three African countries. Even sharper differences emerge for experts and con-
sultants, cited by 28 percent of Chinese respondents but by only a few respon-
dents in the other countries. The pattern is similar for research institutions, 
cited by 11 percent of Chinese respondents but hardly anyone in the other 
four countries. 
Figure 6.1 Level of Education of Firm Owners in the Five Countries
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
12
9
6
3
0
14
16
18
% of firm owners
completed years of education
Zambia
Vietnam
Tanzania
Ethiopia
China
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011.
=== PAGE 116 ===
96 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Finally, suppliers of equipment and raw materials are cited as sources of 
advice in China and Vietnam, but not in Africa. By contrast, competitors are 
cited by numerous ﬁ rms in Africa, but by fewer ﬁ rms in Vietnam and China. 
The picture that emerges is that ﬁ rms in the two Asian countries, particularly in 
China, have access to a much wider range of information sources for the techni-
cal expertise needed to develop new products.
From this, we can infer that ﬁ rms in Sub-Saharan Africa are less able to take 
advantage of links to globally competitive suppliers, customers, and competi-
tors than their Chinese counterparts. Given the same individual skill set of an 
entrepreneur in China and one in Zambia, the one in China has the advantage 
of proximity to a competitive local manufacturing sector. The access of entre-
preneurs to market information, new technology, improved inputs, production 
practices, and global buyers is made easier by proximity to globally competitive 
ﬁ rms. One entrepreneur does not have to know everything, but entrepreneurs 
in Africa have far fewer opportunities than entrepreneurs in China to offset 
shortcomings by accessing the established networks and institutions of a well-
developed manufacturing sector. 
Sector-Speciﬁ c Technical Assistance. Receiving help from family and relatives 
is associated with a smaller ﬁ rm at start-up, while receiving help from experts 
or ﬁ nance from ﬁ nancial institutions is associated with a larger ﬁ rm at start-up 
(table 6.1). 
It would be perilous to interpret this relationship as causal—entrepreneurs 
who seek advice from experts and secure start-up funding from ﬁ nancial 
institutions may simply be better than the average. The relationship neverthe-
less suggests that obtaining advice and ﬁ nance at start-up may lead to good 
entrepreneurship.
To investigate this idea further, we regress (the logarithm of) current ﬁ rm size 
and the ﬁ rm’s employment growth rate on the assistance received at start-up. 
Assistance at start-up remains a strong predictor of future ﬁ rm performance: 
Table 6.1 Firm Size and Assistance Received at Start of Business
Firm size at start
Firm size now
Firm’s growth rate
Source of help 
Coefﬁ cient
t-value
Coefﬁ cient
t-value
Coefﬁ cient
t-value
Family and relatives
–0.213
–3.08
–0.127
–2.56
0.01
1.04
Businesses, clients, and 
 suppliers
0.065
0.90
 0.125
2.42
0.01
1.12
Experts and teachers
0.165
1.73
 0.283
4.26
0.03
2.05
Financial institutions
0.292
2.74
 0.208
2.96
0.02
1.09
Intercept
2.052
34.77
 2.667
62.58
0.07
7.25
Source: Fafchamps and Quinn 2011, table 5, which pools data from firms in China, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Tanzania, 
and Zambia.
=== PAGE 117 ===
SKILLS 
 
97
ﬁ rms that received expert advice at start-up on average grow faster than other 
ﬁ rms by 3 percentage points a year. Again, help at start-up is likely correlated 
with business acumen. China, where expert advice is reported by the largest 
proportion of respondents, also has the highest manufacturing growth rate.
In China the government does not support new ﬁ rms, except with land and 
factory shells, but once the ﬁ rm is established and doing well, government may 
provide many services (including streamlined administrative procedures, sup-
port for technological upgrading, and access to market information through 
networking) with a view to guiding the ﬁ rm and the industry to a nationally 
competitive level. 
In Ethiopia the Ethiopian Leather and Leather Products Technology Insti-
tute selected the Indian Footwear Design and Development Institute to pro-
vide technical assistance for seven shoe factories in design, technical upgrading, 
quality assurance, productivity enhancement, and testing. As a result of the 
technical assistance, cutting at Ramsay Shoe Factory rose from 2,000 pairs a 
day to 2,400, and defect rates dropped from 3 to 1 percent. In July 2010 Ramsay 
signed a deal with Geox, an Italian shoe and apparel manufacturer, to produce 
60,000 pairs a month to be sold in Geox’s outlets in Italy, carrying the label 
“Made in Ethiopia by Ramsay.” Clearly, providing the right technical assistance 
to owner-managers can have a big impact on factory performance.
Direct Training of Entrepreneurs. For entrepreneurs in developing countries 
such as those in Sub-Saharan Africa, it may not be clear whether managerial 
training can contribute to productivity, where it can be found, and whether it is 
affordable. In order to address these issues this study has carried out Kaizen ran-
domized controlled experiments at four industrial clusters in three countries: a 
garment-textile cluster in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, a metalwork cluster in Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia, a rolled steel cluster in Bac Ninh, Vietnam, and a knitwear clus-
ter in Hatay, Vietnam. In these experiments, two types of management training 
programs for entrepreneurs were provided (on site and in the classroom), and 
their impacts on business practices and performance were evaluated based on 
the data collected from participants and nonparticipants before and after each 
type of training program. The enterprises were randomly invited and could 
decide whether to participate or not in any of the training programs. 
The ﬁ ndings show that, in the countries studied, standard business prac-
tices such as book and inventory record keeping are generally not implemented. 
Moreover, the number of enterprises that declined to participate in the pro-
gram was especially high in Ethiopia and Vietnam, suggesting the low expected 
value from the program, presumably due to a lack of prior information about 
such programs and their returns. Following the Kaizen program, however, the 
entrepreneurs’ willingness to pay for managerial training increased signiﬁ cantly. 
Improvements in marketing, quality inspection, record keeping, and Kaizen
=== PAGE 118 ===
98 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
practices are evident, although the impact of the program in these areas dif-
fered across the countries (see Sonobe, Suzuki, and Otsuka 2011 for the detailed 
results). In addition, ﬁ ndings from Ethiopia’s metal cluster show that more 
entrepreneurs in the treatment groups planned to make additional investments 
and upgrade their products or organization in the year after initial training than 
those in the control group. This suggests that the training could also contribute 
to enterprise growth. These ﬁ ndings lend strong support to the view that small 
businesses in developing countries, with few exceptions, do not appreciate the 
potential for managerial improvements to increase proﬁ tability and therefore 
fail to capture gains arising from more efﬁ cient management. Accordingly, 
policy interventions targeted at addressing this information asymmetry and 
providing public resources for awareness and skills development may be appro-
priate in supporting manufacturing competitiveness in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
The discovery that African manufacturing entrepreneurs often lack access 
to sources of information that are widely available elsewhere, particularly in 
China, and may fail to appreciate the beneﬁ ts linked to the information that 
is available provides a rationale for governments to go beyond the universally 
beneﬁ cial policy of expanding access to basic education. While fostering full 
and fair competition, governments should create, fund, and promote programs 
that are designed speciﬁ cally to improve the managerial and technical skills of 
actual and potential entrepreneurs, starting with the high-potential subsectors, 
including the informal sector. 
As the Kaizen study shows, there are two reasons why market forces alone 
will not allocate optimal resources to create and introduce knowledge that 
entrepreneurs need in the informal sector (Sonobe, Suzuki, and Otsuka 2011). 
First, information spillovers and imitation are widespread, with the proxim-
ity of products of rival enterprises and the poaching of inputs and technical 
information from neighbors. Second, entrepreneurs may not know the value of 
training. As a result, the social return to creating and introducing new knowl-
edge, both technical and managerial, exceeds the private return, resulting in 
socially suboptimal investment in new, innovative knowledge. 
For an enterprise to grow, its manager must be an entrepreneur who con-
stantly strives for innovations. To become a dynamic entrepreneur, the manager 
must invest in his or her managerial human capital, but usually lacks the ﬁ nan-
cial resources to do so. Even if the manager has resources, he or she may not 
know where to invest or what to learn. Indeed, the majority of small entrepre-
neurs in Sub-Saharan Africa operate their businesses without realizing whether 
they are making proﬁ ts or losses because they do not keep records of the costs 
and revenues for their various production activities. 
Even a three-week training program can improve entrepreneurs’ manage-
ment practices. The Kaizen program has three modules: marketing and business 
strategy, production and quality management (including a brief introduction to
=== PAGE 119 ===
SKILLS 
 
99
workplace housekeeping techniques and other Kaizen activities), and business 
record keeping. Our experience shows that even these brief programs awaken 
entrepreneurs to the beneﬁ ts of deepening their managerial expertise, with the 
result that their willingness to pay for further training increases substantially. 
Should Kaizen training be the same for owner-managers of small and large 
ﬁ rms? If the training is done in a classroom, the same program will do. If the 
training is done on site, different approaches have to be taken depending on 
the ﬁ rm size (as well as the industry of the ﬁ rm). In the case of large ﬁ rms, on-
site training is given to a small group or section (5–20 participants). A related 
question is whether the effect of the training varies with ﬁ rm size. One of the 
favorable effects of Kaizen training is to improve communication and coordina-
tion among sections within large ﬁ rms. Two-person ﬁ rms may experience fewer 
communication or coordination problems than larger ﬁ rms, so this effect may 
be smaller.1
Generation and Diffusion of Information. In some cases, African governments 
should generate and diffuse strategic information on market opportunities in 
those sectors with potential, yet the private sector is trapped in low growth 
due to information asymmetries. The information should be speciﬁ c, timely, 
veriﬁ able, and targeted to the ﬁ rms most likely to invest, especially potential 
strategic ﬁ rst movers. Besides knowledge of market opportunities, the private 
sector also needs information on production techniques and on new sources 
and new prices of inputs and machines following the removal of import duties 
and the reform of trade logistics. With advances in Internet accessibility, much 
of this information can be collected and disseminated at low cost. 
Another novel way to leverage private initiatives with limited public sec-
tor resources is to create a “market for intervention.”2 The government could 
announce that it wants to help ﬁ rms to improve what they already do by invit-
ing potential beneﬁ ciaries to come up with plans and by helping to ﬁ nance part 
of the costs—for example, for training workers or conducting market surveys 
or feasibility studies. The government could also negotiate something similar 
to an “advance market commitment” by prominent international buyers—for 
example, an agreement with Macy’s to buy 100,000 pairs of shoes backed by a 
government guarantee to pay 50 percent of the cost if the quality standards are 
not met.
Efforts to Facilitate the Entry of First Movers. First movers in late-mover coun-
tries typically face higher costs and risks, especially in Africa, which has limited 
infrastructure and high regulatory and governance risks. But strategic ﬁ rst mov-
ers can catalyze the growth of competitive new industries. The ﬁ rst rose farm 
in Ethiopia led to the creation of a new industry that has generated more than 
US$200 million a year in foreign exchange and created 50,000 jobs since 2000 
(box 6.1).
=== PAGE 120 ===
100 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
B OX 6.1
Ethiopia’s Success in Farming Roses 
Ethiopia’s ﬁ rst rose farm, Golden Roses, was created in 2000. Since then the farm has 
triggered a competitive rose export industry that involves more than 75 ﬁ rms, employs 
more than 50,000 workers, and earns more than US$200 million a year in foreign 
exchange. The idea came from the father of the farm’s owner, Ryaz Shamji, the Indian 
head of a Ugandan conglomerate, after visiting Ethiopia to assess business opportuni-
ties. Favorable soil and climate conditions (warm days and cool nights), competitive 
fuel and electricity costs, and, above all, competitive air freight costs—which account 
for more than half of export-related production costs—made rose farming an easy 
choice, despite the absence of a strong ﬂ ower industry.
The ﬁ rst challenge was ﬁ nding 7 hectares of usable land. Because Ethiopia has no 
land market, doing so took a year and required intervention from high-level authori-
ties, who gave Shamji’s farm a 30-year lease on land abandoned by a nongovernmen-
tal organization. The second constraint was ﬁ nancing, because private banks were 
not willing to lend money to a new venture in Ethiopia. The state-owned Ethiopia 
Development Bank eventually agreed to provide a loan for 30 percent of the project 
(US$1 million) at an 8 percent interest rate. Shamji would not have proceeded with the 
investment without this loan. Another concern was ensuring a reliable water supply, so 
Shamji investigated his options with help from an Israeli company that specializes in irri-
gation systems. The ﬁ nal major challenge—a lack of specialized managerial capability—
was overcome by convincing an Indian from Kenya and an Israeli to move to Ethiopia.
This fair trade–certiﬁ ed farm made a proﬁ t almost immediately. In 2002, based on 
the farm’s success, the prime minister agreed to support the industry by facilitating 
access to land and providing tax incentives, duty-free imports, and long-term ﬁ nancing 
for up to 70 percent of the initial investment. With this support and the demonstration 
effect, investors poured in, enabling the government to meet its goal of developing 
800 hectares of rose farms by 2007. Since the government announced its support, 
more than 75 ﬁ rms have entered the rose industry. 
Shamji and other ﬂ oriculturists suspect that there is large potential for horticulture, 
but no one knows which fruits are smart investments for the region—peaches, apples, 
or something else. A feasibility study could cost more than US$80,000 a fruit, and sev-
eral studies may be needed. With so many eager incumbents and potential entrants, 
even Ethiopia’s pioneer rose farmer is not willing to bear the disadvantages of being 
the industry’s ﬁ rst mover.
This story embodies the highs and lows of ﬁ rst-mover risks, how these risks were 
reduced by government policies and high-level government interventions, and how a 
business’s continued growth depends on steady reforms.
Source: World Bank team interview.
=== PAGE 121 ===
SKILLS 
 
101
First movers can provide many beneﬁ ts, including demonstration effects for 
other potential entrepreneurs and their ﬁ nanciers, specialized infrastructure 
that can be shared, skills development, policy reforms, supplier industries, and 
improvements in the country’s reputation. The ﬁ rst producer of corrugated tin 
roofs in Zambia attracted a dozen followers, largely replacing imports. The ﬁ rst 
rose farm in Ethiopia helped to create a land market as farmers realized that they 
could double their income by leasing their land to rose farms while also working 
for them. Cadot and others (2011) show that survival rates improve signiﬁ cantly 
with the number of ﬁ rms exporting the same product to the same destination. 
The analysis provides strong evidence suggesting that this is due to informa-
tion spillovers (for example, increased conﬁ dence of importers and ﬁ nancers). 
Government support to ﬁ rst movers is thus justiﬁ ed by the need to mitigate the 
higher costs and risks faced by new entrants and by the positive externalities.
Government support to ﬁ rst movers is thus justiﬁ ed by the need to share 
the risk of investment and uncertainty by reducing the high costs of entry and 
fostering the positive externalities associated with new ﬁ rm entry. But such sup-
port should be provided only after lifting a critical mass of the most serious 
constraints so as to remove the need or temptation to provide rents to a few 
well-connected ﬁ rms. Furthermore, such support should only be provided on 
a one-time basis and does not have to cost much. The nature of the market fail-
ure should be identiﬁ ed—information asymmetries, free riders, public goods 
of trade infrastructure, and worker skills—and support should be designed to 
address that market failure. 
Nor does support to ﬁ rst movers have to be targeted exclusively at large ﬁ rms 
or at overseas investors: basic knowledge of markets and suppliers may sufﬁ ce 
to unleash new industries, as with Zambia’s corrugated tin roof industry, which 
grew rapidly from a single to a dozen ﬁ rms and began competing with imports. 
The government could provide a matching grant to share the high risks of ﬁ rst 
movers by, say, paying for part of a feasibility study.
Worker Skills 
Education statistics highlight Africa’s current disadvantage in human capital. 
World Bank data place recent literacy rates of young people ages 15–24 at 45, 
75, and 77 percent, respectively, in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia as opposed 
to 97 and 99 percent, respectively, in Vietnam and China.3 Still, we know that 
China’s rapid expansion of manufactured exports began during a period when 
school attendance and literacy were considerably below their current high lev-
els. Even so, it is clear that the limited dispersion of skills contributes to the 
current inability of most African light manufacturing to compete effectively in 
global (and sometimes even in domestic) markets for labor-intensive products.
=== PAGE 122 ===
102 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
In comparative terms, skills are particularly low in the vast African informal 
sector, but much less so in the small African formal sector, where productivity 
in the best ﬁ rms is sometimes comparable to Asian norms.
Notwithstanding the differences in skills, in all but one subsector (wood 
products) the efﬁ ciency of African workers overlaps the range observed in China 
and Vietnam (table 6.2). The numbers suggest that low-level skills are sufﬁ cient 
for jobs such as in computer management and technology operations in the 
apparel industry. Africa’s potential can also be inferred by the signiﬁ cant positive 
impact that targeted technical assistance programs have had on both efﬁ ciency 
and quality (for example, the Ethiopian shoes industry). So Sub-Saharan Africa 
can be competitive in light industries that do not require semiskilled workers, 
because there is a plentiful supply of trainable unskilled workers.
To graduate to more complex production such as dress shirts or trousers 
in the apparel industry, manual or artisanal skills become important. If Sub- 
Saharan Africa wants to upgrade its industries to more complex products, 
there is no shortcut to having a labor force with more vocational training. The 
qualitative interviews and factory visits in China and Vietnam showed that 
the assembly line operations involving weaving machines to produce sweat-
ers, sports shoes, and toys—or even labeling and packaging products—require 
workers with more technical skills and higher literacy. Comparative advantage 
is dynamic: mastering the production of the simplest light manufactures such 
as T-shirts can open the door to a comparative advantage in more sophisticated 
light manufactures, but not without a corresponding upgrading of industry 
skills (Lin 2009, 2010). And because skills upgrading is a public good, there is a 
role for soft industrial policy (Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 2010). 
Table 6.2 Labor Efficiency in the Five Countries
Labor productivity
China
Vietnam
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Zambia
Polo shirts (pieces per employee 
 per day)
18–35
8–14
7–19
5–20
—
Leather loafers (pieces per employee 
 per day)
3–7
1–6
1–7
4–6
—
Wooden chairs (pieces per employee 
 per day)
3–6
1–3
0.2–0.4
0.3–0.7
0.2–0.6
Crown corks (pieces per employee 
 per day × 1,000)
13–25
25–27
10
—
201
Wheat processing (tons per employee 
 per day)
0.2–0.4
0.6–0.8
0.6–1.9
1–22
0.6–1.6
Dairy farming (liters per employee 
 per day)
23–51
2–4
18–71
10–100
19–179
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: — = Not available. Crown cork (bottle cap) production in Zambia is fully automated. Figures for wheat 
processing come from a sample of small firms.
=== PAGE 123 ===
SKILLS 
 
103
Possible Solutions from Asia 
Sub-Saharan governments could offer technical assistance to foster industry-
speciﬁ c vocational training for their less-skilled workers. Such training could 
be offered in industrial clusters for smaller ﬁ rms and in the workplace or in 
industrial parks for larger ﬁ rms. Funding for technical assistance could be lever-
aged from donors. In the medium term, governments, in partnership with the 
private sector, could offer publicly funded programs to turn out technicians 
who can operate and repair simple machines, read instructions, keep system-
atic records, and use the Internet to communicate and search for information. 
A good illustration of the potential beneﬁ ts of such programs is the Penang 
Skills Development Centre (Malaysia), which offers a variety of sector-speciﬁ c 
short- and long-term certiﬁ cate, diploma, and degree courses for all levels of 
the workforce.4 
Dedicated skills development schools for some sectors have had huge pay-
offs in countries where they were directed at sectors in which the country had 
a latent comparative advantage. By focusing on the knowledge and skills for 
an emerging sector, such schools have rapidly produced a pool of technically 
trained workers for the sector’s takeoff. In Chile the government established the 
Salmon Technical Institute to train a large pool of skilled workers to scale up 
the farming of salmon, less known to the smaller ﬁ shermen. To exploit India’s 
comparative advantage in fruit cultivation and exports, the government estab-
lished the Indian Institute of Horticulture Research in 1968. And when it noticed 
the emerging grape sector, in 1997, it went one step further and established the 
National Research Center for Grapes. In Malaysia the government set up the 
Palm Oil Research Institute to foster its palm oil industry. Most of these schools 
serve multiple purposes—from propagating simple extension practices to con-
ducting high-powered research. 
In the early stages of developing its light manufacturing, Sub-Saharan gov-
ernments could use their latecomer advantage to form twinning arrange-
ments with other developing countries that already have technical schools. The 
on going technical cooperation between India’s Footwear Design and Develop-
ment Institute and Ethiopia’s Ministry of Trade and Industry is training Ethio-
pian leather shoe–producing ﬁ rms to apply the latest benchmarking techniques 
to produce globally competitive footwear. This partnership has already deliv-
ered substantial payoffs in improving ﬁ rm productivity, lowering waste and 
rejection rates, and improving the overall quality of shoes produced.
Notes 
 1. This may not always be the case. For example, imagine that two workers have to 
share the same room. Without the training on work layout from Kaizen, one worker 
may be irritated in looking for a tool, thinking that the roommate has misplaced
=== PAGE 124 ===
104 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
it and that this kind of inconvenience would not happen if they did not share the 
room.
 2. We are indebted to Brian Pinto (PRMVP, World Bank) for the suggestions made in 
this context.
 3. See http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.1524.LT.ZS.
 4. See http://www.psdc.org.my/html/default.aspx?ID=9&PID=155.
References 
Bartelsman, Eric J., and Marc Doms. 2000. “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from 
Longitudinal Microdata.” Journal of Economic Literature 38 (3): 569–94. 
Bloom, Nicholas, Ben Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2011. 
“Does Management Matter? Evidence from India.” NBER Working Paper 16658, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cadot, Olivier, Leonardo Iacovone, Denisse Pierola, and Ferdinand Rauch. 2011.  “Suc-
cess and Failures of African Exporters.” Policy Research Working Paper 5657, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
Clarke George. 2011a. “Wages and Productivity in Manufacturing in Africa: Some Styl-
ized Facts.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online 
in Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC.
———. 2011b. “Assessing How the Investment Climate Affects Firm Performance 
in Africa: Evidence from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.” Background paper 
(Light Manufacturing in Africa Study).  Available online in Volume III at http://econ.
worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Conway, Patrick, and Manju Shah. 2010. “Incentives, Exports, and International Com-
petitiveness in Sub- Saharan Africa: Lessons from the Apparel Industry.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Simon Quinn. 2011. “Results from a Qualitative Survey.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Harrison, Ann, and Andres Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and 
Industrial Policy for Developing Countries.” In Handbook of Development Eco-
nomics, Vol. 5 of Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig eds., 4039–214. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in 
China and India.” Working Paper 09-04, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census 
Bureau, Washington, DC.
Lewis, William W. 2005. The Power of Productivity: Wealth, Poverty, and the Threat to 
Global Stability. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
=== PAGE 125 ===
SKILLS 
 
105
Lin, Justin. 2009. Economic Development and Transition: Thought, Strategy, and Viability. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2010. “New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Development.” 
Policy Research Working Paper 5197, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Sonobe, Tetsushi, Aya Suzuki, and Keijiro Otsuka. 2011. “Kaizen for Managerial Skills 
Improvement in Small and Medium Enterprises: An Impact Evaluation Study.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online as Volume IV 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 126 ===

=== PAGE 127 ===
Chapter 7
Policy interventions should begin with pilot case studies and be continually 
revised and updated as the situation evolves. In addition, implementation 
should be decentralized, to be closer to ﬁ rms, increase accountability, and foster 
competition between local governments. As discussed in chapter 1, the key to 
selective intervention is to focus on policies that reinforce the country’s latent 
comparative advantage, particularly in sectors where it is possible to identify 
a short and clear path toward making producers competitive in domestic and 
overseas product markets. Ideally, the size of government intervention to over-
come constraints and information failures will be small, and the duration of 
such interventions will be brief, allowing them to be scaled back as initial suc-
cess attracts rising ﬂ ows of private resources into newly competitive sectors. 
Not all efforts to support the chosen industries will succeed. A lesson from 
East Asia is that the government should be willing to abandon failing policies, so 
it is important to keep the pilots small. The priorities and sequencing of policy 
reforms and interventions should satisfy three criteria. First, these measures 
should focus on sectors and subsectors demonstrating the most potential for 
comparative advantage and job growth. Second, they should be the most cost-
effective in the short and long runs, with the least ﬁ scal impact. Third, imple-
mentation capacity, governance, and the political economy of policy reforms 
should be thoroughly assessed and used as a guide. 
The report highlights the importance of industry-speciﬁ c issues (for exam-
ple, disease affecting the quality of leather, import tariffs on steel, and price 
caps on agricultural products) in addition to economywide issues (for example, 
poor access to industrial land, lack of technical skills, and poor trade logistics). 
This raises the issue of how to prioritize and package policy reforms within 
and across sectors given that the government cannot tackle all issues at once. 
But the economywide and the industry-speciﬁ c reforms need not be mutually 
exclusive. They can be complementary, and both types are needed to move the 
economy forward. Priorities have to be set on the basis of cost-beneﬁ t analysis, 
and in cases where hard choices have to be made, the government will need 
to prioritize its actions with regard to the locations and industries of highest 
potential, taking into account the political cost of reforms. Such an approach 
Implementation
=== PAGE 128 ===
108 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
would also facilitate expanding the reforms through demonstration effects. This 
is what China did in the case of land reforms (initiated in the Shenzhen Special 
Economic Zone) and Mauritius did in the case of labor reforms (ﬁ rst limited 
to exporters). Of course, such deliberate targeting of reforms may be prone to 
mistakes and capture—hence the importance of putting in place a transparent 
and professional process to carry them out, together with the political courage 
to correct mistakes.
Competition 
Ongoing patterns of development in light manufacturing in China and Viet-
nam show that competition is the most critical aspect of competitiveness. In 
China, government policies to facilitate growth in light manufacturing are 
designed for selected industries rather than for selected ﬁ rms and allow open 
competition. Indeed, the Chinese government has leveled the playing ﬁ eld for 
even small ﬁ rms to compete in many subsectors of light industry, and the Viet-
namese government is trying to do so. The policy approach in this study pro-
poses active government support for light manufacturing sectors (as in China) 
and, in the case of ﬁ rst movers, even for speciﬁ c ﬁ rms (as in Ethiopia’s new rose 
plantations) through technical assistance, rollback of institutional obstacles (for 
example, surrounding land acquisition), development of input industries, and 
creation of industrial parks. Policy and implementation should ensure that the 
beneﬁ ciaries of government policy are determined by market forces and not 
by the special interests of government ofﬁ cials or rent-seeking ﬁ rms. In many 
countries, corruption poses a risk to the government’s ability to play a positive 
role in promoting competitiveness and growth. In China the interests of gov-
ernment ofﬁ cials and society were aligned such that ofﬁ cials are keen to expand 
investment and growth. 
In addition to microeconomic interventions of the sort proposed in this 
report, governments can facilitate robust private sector growth by maintain-
ing macroeconomic stability and implementing sensible long-term policies 
for managing important natural resources. African governments have indeed 
recorded marked improvement in macro-policies during the past decade; 
achievements include lower inﬂ ation, reduced ﬁ scal and trade deﬁ cits, and, 
partly as a result, higher growth of gross domestic product. Ethiopia’s efforts to 
tap the hydro-power potential of its rivers represent an initiative in the resource 
management ﬁ eld that, if successful, has the potential to reverse long-standing 
shortages of electricity that have undercut past industrialization efforts. The pri-
orities and sequencing of policy interventions should follow four criteria. First, 
policy interventions should be undertaken only if a market failure (existence of
=== PAGE 129 ===
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
109
a pure public good, externalities, noncompetitive markets as a result of policy 
distortions, information asymmetries, or coordination problems) prevents the 
private market from adequately playing its role. Second, these interventions 
should focus on sectors and subsectors that demonstrate the most potential 
for comparative advantage and job growth. Third, they should be cost-effective 
in the short and long runs, with limited ﬁ scal impact. Fourth, implementation 
capacity and implications for governance and the political economy of reforms 
should be assessed thoroughly. 
Public-Private Partnerships 
In China (and less so in Vietnam) the public sector has overcome its initial hos-
tility and, despite remaining obstacles associated with property rights, access to 
ﬁ nance, rule of law, and so on, has demonstrated growing capacity to support 
and cooperate with private business, especially at the local level and in sectors 
like light industry that do not occupy a prominent position in ofﬁ cial devel-
opment plans. In Africa, by contrast, an adversarial relationship often exists 
between the public and private sectors. Public entities view private ﬁ rms as 
a source of rents or as vicious, corrupt proﬁ t seekers bent on exploiting the 
nation’s resources. Private ﬁ rms see the public sector as a source of rent seeking 
or trouble making. Bridging this gap will take some time. 
In the early years of industrial development the Chinese government built 
a reasonable track record in providing macroeconomic stability and gradu-
ally dismantled elements of the former planned economy that had prevented 
the establishment of openly private enterprises and hampered the expansion 
of small and medium enterprises in the public sector. Chinese governments 
provide a wide range of ﬁ scal incentives in the form of tax holidays for newly 
established companies in industrial zones. They refund value added taxes to 
exporters. They clear land for development of the zones and engage private 
developers to provide the facilities and services. They also help industry by cul-
tivating networks and associations.
In recent years rising costs for labor, land, energy, and materials, limited land, 
and increasing environmental requirements have made it harder for local gov-
ernments to provide these incentives. But the ongoing commitment of Chinese 
local governments to fueling local economic growth, which is rooted in the 
beneﬁ ts that strong growth provides to local ofﬁ cials in the form of improved 
prospects for promotion as well as personal emoluments, reﬂ ects the success 
of China’s current system in broadly aligning the interests of the center, local 
administrations, the business sector, and the populace at-large, all of whom 
have shared in the beneﬁ ts of sustained growth.
=== PAGE 130 ===
110 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
High-Level Government Commitment 
For the proposed agenda to attract both domestic and foreign investors to the 
light manufacturing sectors, private investors contemplating risky investments 
need convincing assurances from the highest level of government regarding 
the stability of the supportive policy agenda and the regime’s determination 
to avoid the sort of expropriation that has stripped private ﬁ rms of carefully 
built assets and opportunities. Appointing a dedicated high-level implementa-
tion team with direct access to top national government leaders will help to 
reassure investors and simultaneously increase the chances of developing and 
implementing the proposed reform program in an effective and timely fashion. 
The Role of Development Partners 
While the policy measures proposed in this report are well within the imple-
mentation capacity of African countries such as Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia, 
they may be taxing for others, especially countries that have recently emerged 
from conﬂ icts. Development partners (nongovernmental organizations, trade 
and business associations, multilateral and bilateral donors) can help to remove 
bottlenecks in speciﬁ c subsectors. In most cases, multilateral or bilateral donor 
ﬁ nancing of value chain analyses and feasibility studies could reduce the risks 
to ﬁ rst movers. 
Governance and the Political Economy of Reforms 
Despite the limited capacity and weak governance of some Sub-Saharan Afri-
can countries, the approach proposed will not overburden the administrative 
capabilities of the target nations for several reasons. First, the magnitude of 
policy intervention is limited, so any rents generated are also likely to be lim-
ited. Second, the proposed policy reforms are based on the latent comparative 
advantage of the target economies, which means that small, temporary support 
may attract many new entrants (as in Ethiopia’s rose export sector), resulting in 
intensiﬁ ed competition and obviating the need for additional support. Third, 
the policy interventions themselves are likely to increase competition (for 
example, by reducing entry costs and risks) as well as the capacity of ﬁ rms to 
compete—the opposite of what the past failed industrial policies did in Africa 
(such as providing protection and subsidies to a few companies in industries 
in which the country had no comparative advantage). Finally, the presence of 
economic expertise at the highest levels of government can surely help them to 
expedite implementation of the policies proposed in this report and to respond 
promptly and effectively to difﬁ culties as they arise, as is the case in Ethiopia.
=== PAGE 131 ===
3
Identifying the 
Potential and Easing 
the Constraints
Part
=== PAGE 132 ===

=== PAGE 133 ===
Chapter 8
Ethiopia exempliﬁ es how the various analytical tools can help to identify and 
resolve the most important constraints in a country by differentiating subsec-
tors and ﬁ rm sizes (box 8.1). Three main results emerge from the analysis:
• Ethiopia has the potential to become globally competitive in large segments 
of light manufacturing (apparel, leather products, and agribusiness) and, if 
successful, could create millions of productive jobs in the process by lever-
aging its labor cost advantage (low wages combined with high labor pro-
ductivity in good-practice ﬁ rms) and comparative advantage in the natural 
resource industries (agriculture, livestock, and forestry). Other developing 
countries such as Vietnam managed to create millions of jobs in light manu-
facturing by leveraging similar advantages and by attracting leading investors 
into the countries. 
• Issues in key input industries (such as lack of quality leather and high 
cost of wheat and wood) collectively are the main constraints on Ethio-
pia’s competitiveness in light manufacturing because input costs represent 
more than 70 percent of the production cost in these industries. The other 
important constraints are poor trade logistics (critical for apparel) and 
poor access to industrial land, ﬁ nance, and skills, which particularly affect 
smaller ﬁ rms.
• Implementing a short list of speciﬁ c policy interventions would go a long 
way toward addressing the main constraints. Speciﬁ c interventions that 
could have a short-term impact include permitting unlimited duty-free 
imports of leather and fabrics, reducing the cost of trade ﬁ nance, and liber-
alizing domestic markets for agricultural inputs and outputs. Other poten-
tially fruitful interventions include removing import tariffs on additional 
light manufacturing inputs, developing plug-and-play industrial parks, 
improving customs procedures, reducing transport costs, developing collat-
eral markets (machines, land, and cattle), and deploying targeted technical 
training programs. Once policy makers decide to embark on a substantial 
program of such interventions, the government should actively identify and 
encourage prospective lead investors to examine emergent project opportu-
Ethiopia as Exemplar
=== PAGE 134 ===
114 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
nities in Ethiopia’s light manufacturing industries. The government should 
also invite leading investors to pursue opportunities in key input industries 
such as agriculture, livestock, and wood plantations, as well as downstream 
manufacturing sectors like leather products, apparel, and agroprocessing. 
Our review focuses on ﬁ ve light manufacturing subsectors. What follows 
summarizes our ﬁ ndings with regard to development opportunities, existing 
constraints, and proposed pathways to relaxing those constraints. We then syn-
thesize the results across all subsectors and discuss how a reform program could 
address institutional, ﬁ scal, and political economy issues that currently limit the 
prospects for expanding production, employment, and exports in all segments 
of light manufacturing.
Ethiopia navigated the global economic crisis in 2008–09 better than many 
other developing countries, encountering only modest declines in exports, remit-
tances, and foreign investments, which have since recovered beyond their pre-
crisis levels. Growth in exports and earnings, in conjunction with a relative slow-
down in imports, has enabled the buildup of foreign exchange reserves. Overall 
inﬂ ation has dropped to single digits, mainly due to declining food prices, and 
growth has remained strong at about 8–9 percent a year since 2009. The Ethio-
pian government is committed to achieving continued growth within a stable 
macroeconomic framework, in the context of the new ﬁ ve-year development plan 
(Ministry of Finance and Economic Development 2010). The strategic pillars for 
the plan include sustaining rapid economic growth through investment in agri-
culture and infrastructure, promotion of industrialization, enhancement of social 
development, and strengthening of governance and the role of youth and women. 
Although each country has a unique economy, and several aspects of Ethio-
pia’s political environment, governance, and institutions make it a special case 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, sufﬁ cient common factors exist to suggest that Ethiopia 
is a good exemplar for a fairly large group of African countries. Ethiopia is 
endowed with a large number of natural resources that can provide valuable 
inputs for light manufacturing industries that serve both domestic and export 
markets. Among its abundant resources are a large cattle population whose 
skins and hides can be processed into leather and its products; forests whose 
wood can be used in the furniture industry; cotton that can be used in the 
garments industry; and agricultural land and lakes that can provide inputs for 
agroprocessing industries. Ethiopia has abundant labor whose low costs offer 
it a comparative advantage in less-skilled labor-intensive sectors such as light 
manufacturing. Several negative factors are also common to Ethiopia and other 
low-wage African countries, such as shortage of industrial land, poor trade 
logistics, particularly in landlocked countries, and access to ﬁ nance. 
This report does not claim that these Ethiopia-speciﬁ c ﬁ ndings can be gen-
eralized to all Sub-Saharan African countries, although, where commonalities
=== PAGE 135 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
115
are found across the three study countries, they are discussed in part II of this 
volume (chapters 2 through 7). But the new analytical approach applied to 
Ethiopia can be replicated for other African countries to derive speciﬁ c diag-
noses and propose solutions tailored to country circumstances. Detailed policy 
recommendations for Tanzania and Zambia will be available shortly. The rep-
lication of this methodology beyond our countries of focus will enable a rich 
analysis of the constraints on light manufacturing in other Sub-Saharan African 
countries and provide concrete policy recommendations to facilitate the growth 
of this sector across the region. This analytical approach is what distinguishes 
this study from others (see box 8.1). 
Apparel: Solving Trade Logistics Issues
This section discusses Ethiopia’s potential to raise output, create employment, 
and become globally competitive in the apparel sector, provided that the key 
constraints to competitiveness are addressed.
B OX 8.1
Analytical Tools 
The study draws on ﬁ ve analytical tools applied in 2010–11: 
• New research work based on the Enterprise Surveys
• Qualitative interviews with about 300 enterprises (both formal and informal of all 
sizes) by the study team in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia and in China and Viet-
nam, based on a questionnaire designed by Professor John Sutton (London School 
of Economics)
• Quantitative interviews of about 1,400 enterprises (both formal and informal of 
all sizes) by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at Oxford University 
in the same countries, based on the questionnaire designed by Professor Marcel 
Fafchamps and Dr. Simon Quinn (Oxford University) 
• Comparative value chain and feasibility analysis based on in-depth interviews of 
about 300 formal medium enterprises in the same ﬁ ve countries, conducted by the 
consulting ﬁ rm Global Development Solutions, Inc. 
• A Kaizen study on the impact of managerial training for owners of small and 
medium enterprises. This training, delivered to about 250 entrepreneurs in Ethiopia, 
Tanzania, and Vietnam, was led by Japanese researchers from the Foundation for 
Advanced Studies on International Development and the National Graduate Insti-
tute for Policy Studies.
=== PAGE 136 ===
116 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Ethiopia’s Potential
Ethiopia’s past performance in apparel has been poor (US$8 million in exports 
in 2009, a thousandth of the US$8 billion in exports for Vietnam, which has a 
similar population). The sector employs only 9,000 workers (compared with 
1 million in Vietnam), most of them producing low-quality products for the 
domestic market in small, low-productivity ﬁ rms. Only a handful of large ﬁ rms 
(employing about 1,000 workers) have managed to export apparel—mostly 
non-time-sensitive low-value items. But the detailed comparative value chain 
analysis (Global Development Solutions 2011) shows that Ethiopia has the 
potential to become globally competitive in apparel, thanks to the following:
• A large underemployed workforce and a signiﬁ cant and growing labor cost 
advantage (wages are a ﬁ fth of China’s and half of Vietnam’s; consideration 
of nonwage labor costs would widen Ethiopia’s potential advantage)
• Trainable workers, with Ethiopian workers in the few exporting ﬁ rms pro-
ducing as many polo shirts of the same quality per day as workers in Viet-
nam (half of China’s) using similar technology, giving a 5 percent produc-
tion cost advantage over both Vietnam and China (Global Development 
Solutions 2011) 
• Access to a state-of-the-art container port (Djibouti), with a favorable geo-
graphic position
• Potential to develop a competitive cotton or textiles industry due to good 
climatic and soil conditions together with cheap hydro-energy (under con-
struction), saving both on transportation costs and on delivery times
• Duty-free access to the European Union (EU) and U.S. markets (as with the 
African Growth and Opportunity Act).
With a population similar to Vietnam’s, Ethiopia has the potential to create as 
many jobs in this sector as Vietnam, provided several constraints are addressed. 
Main Constraints to Competitiveness
The binding constraint on Ethiopia’s global competitiveness in apparel is 
poor trade logistics, which nearly eliminate the country’s wage advantage (ﬁ g-
ure 8.1). Poor trade logistics also eliminate Ethiopia from the higher-value 
time-sensitive segments of the market: elapsed time between order and deliv-
ery exceeds 90 days and remains unpredictable. The competitiveness penalty 
resulting from poor trade logistics is compounded by the absence of competi-
tive input industries (such as textiles), forcing ﬁ rms to import inputs at high 
costs and with long, unpredictable delays. Poor trade logistics are more bind-
ing for large exporting ﬁ rms. But as small and medium enterprises become 
more competitive and link with large ﬁ rms, they too will be constrained by 
trade logistics.
=== PAGE 137 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
117
Poor trade logistics in Ethiopia can be attributed to two factors: high han-
dling and ﬁ nancing costs and physical distance from production centers to the 
Djibouti port: 
• The high handling and ﬁ nancing costs have four components. Charges by 
commercial banks are steep for trade-related ﬁ nancial services such as let-
ters of credit: letters of credit cost 3 percent for imports and 2 percent for 
exports, compared with less than 1 percent for ﬁ rms in China and Vietnam. 
This imposes a 2 percent production cost penalty on exporters. The National 
Bank of Ethiopia charges a 1.5 percent foreign exchange commission for the 
dollars needed to import the inputs—adding a further 1 percent production 
cost penalty for exporters. Waiting for the bank’s authorization creates long 
and uncertain delays (up to six months when foreign exchange is scarce). 
Dealing with customs adds a 0.5 percent production cost penalty; in addi-
tion, customs procedures take 25 days longer in Ethiopia than in China. Port, 
handling, and customs fees are higher in Ethiopia. It costs US$600 to handle 
an imported 20-foot container in Djibouti, compared with US$80 in China.
• Ethiopia’s manufacturing is centered in Addis Ababa, requiring the transport 
of inputs and outputs between Addis Ababa and Djibouti port 800 kilometers 
away. In addition to the long distance, other factors compound the problem. 
First, the lack of competition in trucking and the absence of railways, coupled 
with high fuel taxes, mean very high transportation costs. Second, it costs 
Figure 8.1 Costs to Produce a Polo Shirt in Ethiopia Compared with Costs in China
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
wage
(front line)
worker‘s skill
input cost
financing
logistics 
others
U.S. cents
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: Here, worker skills cover labor efficiency.
=== PAGE 138 ===
118 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
60 percent more to ship to the United States from Djibouti than from China. 
Shipping costs from Djibouti to Europe are about the same as from China, 
despite Ethiopia’s relative proximity to European ports, due to less trafﬁ c in 
Djibouti and competition issues in shipping. Together, these two factors add 
up to a 3 percent production cost disadvantage and a six-day delivery lag 
(compared with China) for shipments bound for European ports.
Other important constraints include the following:
• Lack of domestic input industries, particularly textiles. Ethiopia has an ample 
supply of cotton, but the spinning and ginning industries are weak (a leg-
acy of state ownership of textile mills ), and most apparel accessories (such 
as buttons) still need to be imported. One ﬁ rm with foreign investors has 
invested heavily in transforming cotton into fabric, to serve its apparel pro-
duction. Firms in China and Vietnam do not need to make such investments 
because either the domestic supply is ample or importing inputs is easy.
• Difﬁ culties in accessing industrial land and ﬁ nance for small ﬁ rms. Larger 
exporters have preferred access to both. Small ﬁ rms have one or two rooms, 
with a shop front and workshop. Their scope for expansion is limited by dif-
ﬁ culties in getting ﬁ nance to buy land and buildings and to upgrade machin-
ery (Fafchamps and Quinn 2011). This is aggravated by the fragmented land 
market, with inﬂ ated prices and long delays in transactions. 
• Weak entrepreneurial and worker skills, especially among smaller ﬁ rms. Weak 
skills prevent domestic ﬁ rms from plugging into the global supply chain. 
The apparel market demands rapidly changing designs, so apparel produc-
ers need to be well linked to buyers and able to adapt production designs to 
meet the quality and designs demanded by the global market. The quanti-
tative survey shows that small entrepreneurs in Ethiopia have less access to 
skills and information than their Asian counterparts (Fafchamps and Quinn 
2011). Good-practice entrepreneurs in both Asia and Ethiopia have demon-
strated that low-skilled workers could achieve high productivity with proper 
incentives and a few weeks of on-the-job training. 
Recommendations to Unleash Ethiopia’s Potential
Addressing a critical mass of trade logistics issues would put Ethiopia in a position 
to follow the examples of China and Vietnam by attracting overseas investors to 
lead the industry’s development and provide training and experience for prospec-
tive domestic followers. Taking advantage of Ethiopia’s high-quality cotton and 
expected cheap hydro-electricity to develop a competitive textile industry would 
further enhance the prospects for building competitive strength in apparel. 
In the short term, bringing the cost of letters of credit to the level in China 
and Vietnam would reduce exporters’ free-on-board (f.o.b.) production costs by
=== PAGE 139 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
119
more than 3 percent. Eliminating the foreign exchange fee (1.5 percent) charged 
by the National Bank of Ethiopia and guaranteeing the immediate availability of 
the foreign exchange for all apparel producers would reduce f.o.b. production 
costs for exporters by 1 percent and considerably reduce the length and uncer-
tainty of deliveries. Establishing a “green channel” for apparel at customs would 
reduce f.o.b. production costs by 0.5 percent and slash customs delays from 30 
days to ﬁ ve, the same as in Hong Kong SAR, China. Negotiating lower port and 
handling fees as part of a strategic partnership with Djibouti could reduce f.o.b. 
production costs by 1 percent.
For the 800-kilometer stretch between Addis Ababa and Djibouti port, a 
multimodal transport arrangement combining trucking, rail, air, and ship-
ping would improve connectivity and increase competition. Rehabilitating the 
railroads from Addis Ababa to Djibouti could further reduce transportation 
costs and delays. Competition in trucking could be fostered by opening it to 
new entrants, including foreign companies, and creating a level playing ﬁ eld 
for domestic companies. Lowering the fuel tax and import tariffs on trucks and 
spare parts would reduce f.o.b. production costs for manufactured goods by 
around 0.5 percent. Developing a plug-and-play industrial park in the vicinity 
of Djibouti (for example, at Dire Dawa, where the climate is not too hot) would 
reduce f.o.b. production costs by 2 percent and shave six days from the time to 
deliver the products. Both China and Vietnam started their apparel production 
industries by setting up industrial zones next to world-class ports.
To deal with other less binding constraints, Ethiopia could facilitate access 
to inputs (beyond improving trade logistics) through three sets of measures:
• Eliminate all import tariffs on apparel inputs. Import tariffs on apparel inputs 
now range from 10 to 35 percent. Duty-free access to inputs is limited to 
exporters, with duty levied on any ﬁ nal goods not exported. Eliminating the 
duty would enable exporters to resell their material waste (reducing produc-
tion costs by 1 percent) and facilitate links between (large) exporters and 
(small) domestic producers. This change would increase productivity and out-
put growth among small players and give exporters greater ﬂ exibility to meet 
large orders. Such a measure would also facilitate implementation of a “green” 
customs channel for apparel—another inexpensive and beneﬁ cial reform.
• Support competitive input industries, particularly textiles. Preliminary evi-
dence points to the possibility that Ethiopia could develop a competitive 
textile industry by taking advantage of its favorable climatic and soil con-
ditions for cotton production and expected competitive sources of hydro-
energy (detailed feasibility study to be conducted). Eliminating imports of 
fabric would reduce production costs by 3 percent and delivery delays by 
almost half. The current policy of banning exports of cotton to ensure that 
textile mills are supplied may be counterproductive as it lowers demand and
=== PAGE 140 ===
120 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
hence the returns to cotton growing, thus discouraging investment in a sec-
tor that could contribute to large-scale future employment growth in textiles 
and especially in apparel. 
• Develop a plug-and-play industrial park in Addis Ababa and conduct a feasi-
bility study for one closer to Djibouti. As demonstrated in China, such parks 
can solve several constraints simultaneously by providing ﬁ rms with afford-
able access to industrial land, standardized factory shells, and worker hous-
ing, as well as training facilities and one-stop shops for business regulations. 
They considerably reduce ﬁ nancing costs and risks for the better small ﬁ rms, 
allowing them to grow into medium enterprises before they are sufﬁ ciently 
large and ﬁ nancially secure enough to obtain bank loans. By creating indus-
trial parts, China has avoided the “missing middle” problem.
Once a program to ameliorate a critical mass of trade logistics issues takes 
shape, government agencies should promote Ethiopia globally as a destina-
tion for investment among leading apparel ﬁ rms. In addition to providing 
immediate infusions of capital, foreign exchange, and technical, managerial, 
or marketing expertise, substantial foreign investment can trigger major exter-
nalities, as Daewoo did for Bangladesh by training a new generation of apparel 
entrepreneurs.
Leather Products: Dealing with Shortages of 
Quality Leather
The leather subsector has even greater potential for production, exports, and 
employment for Ethiopia than the apparel sector. Facilitating the import of 
quality processed leather in the short term while facilitating the development 
of a competitive leather supply chain would position Ethiopia to become one of 
the leading global centers for producing quality leather goods. 
Ethiopia’s Potential
Ethiopia’s current performance is as poor in the leather product industry as 
in apparel. Exports in 2010 were US$8 million, compared with US$2.3 billion 
for Vietnam. Employment is only 8,000, mostly in small ﬁ rms producing low-
quality items for the domestic market, compared with 600,000 in Vietnam.
Ethiopia’s potential in the leather product industry stems from the following:
• Ethiopia has a 12 percent production cost advantage over Vietnam and 37 
percent over China because this subsector is even more labor intensive than 
apparel (labor accounts for 40 percent of total production costs in China, 
compared with 10 percent in apparel). As in apparel, Ethiopia combines very 
low wages with highly trainable labor, as demonstrated in the larger ﬁ rms,
=== PAGE 141 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
121
where Ethiopian workers produce as many shoes of similar quality per day 
as workers in Vietnam (80 percent of the Chinese level). 
• Thanks to good climatic and soil conditions, Ethiopian cattle produce some 
of the world’s best leather. Ethiopia is among Africa’s leading cattle-producing 
countries; the combination of ample supplies of high-quality leather and com-
petitive hydro-energy should enable the development of a world-class leather 
industry. 
• The competitiveness penalty due to poor trade logistics is less serious in 
leather goods than in apparel. Ethiopia’s wage cost advantage exceeds the trade 
logistics cost penalty, and the subsector is less time sensitive than apparel.
• As with apparel, Ethiopian leather products have duty-free access to the EU 
and U.S. markets.
Main Constraints to Competitiveness
The most binding constraint is the shortage of quality processed leather. With 
full liberalization of leather imports, Ethiopia would already be in a position 
to be globally competitive. Low wages and high labor intensity mean that the 
10 percent production cost disadvantage due to poor trade logistics (assuming 
that leather has to be imported) would not eliminate Ethiopia’s production cost 
advantage (ﬁ gure 8.2). The additional order-to-delivery delays would also not 
be a serious threat to competitiveness in this industry, which is much less time 
sensitive than apparel (fashions in men’s leather shoes change slowly).
Figure 8.2 Costs to Produce Leather Shoes in Ethiopia Compared with Costs in China
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: Here, worker skills cover labor efficiency.
–600
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
labor cost
worker‘s skill
input cost
financing
logistics
others
U.S. cents
=== PAGE 142 ===
122 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
The shortage of quality domestic processed leather has three causes:
• Poor disease control and weak veterinary services. As a result of disease, only 
small pieces of skin are free of blemishes. This is largely the result of failure 
to control for ectoparasites (a disease that causes skin blemishes) and the 
domination of the livestock industry by farmers who own only a few animals 
and sell skins as a side business at best. 
• Lack of quality processing of raw hides and skins. Ethiopia still suffers from 
the legacy of government control over tanneries. Recent private investments 
and technology upgrading offer brighter prospects if the supply of quality 
skins can be improved. Taxing exports of skins and semiprocessed skins may 
backﬁ re by artiﬁ cially reducing domestic prices, thus reducing the incentives 
for increased private investment along the supply chain.
• Import bans on processed leather. The Ethiopian government has effectively 
banned the import of processed leather through cumbersome administrative 
requirements. For example, companies willing to import leather said that they 
have to justify why they cannot source the leather from domestic tanneries. 
Other constraints are less important: 
• Poor trade logistics. Although not a binding constraint, poor logistics result 
in a 10 percent production cost penalty (6 percent if leather does not need 
to be imported) for the same reasons as in apparel.
• Lower product quality due to lack of entrepreneurial managerial skills. Leather 
loafers exported from Ethiopia are of a lower quality than those made in 
China, as demonstrated by the lower f.o.b. price for leather shoe manufactur-
ers in Ethiopia. This difference in quality is in part due to the low managerial 
and technical expertise of ﬁ rm owners and managers. The Leather Institute 
in Ethiopia was established with technical assistance from India to improve 
managerial skills. In addition, foreign investors have already begun to enter 
the leather products sector. The success of some ﬁ rms in entering the Italian 
market demonstrates the potential for improved productivity and quality to 
transform Ethiopia’s leather sector into a competitive industry capable of 
generating large increases in employment and exports. 
• Difﬁ culties on the part of smaller ﬁ rms accessing land, ﬁ nance, and skills. These 
difﬁ culties keep smaller ﬁ rms in a low-productivity, low-quality trap, unable 
to upgrade technology or expand production. 
Recommendations to Unleash Ethiopia’s Potential
Enabling imports of high-quality processed leather would be a quick and easy 
solution to the acute shortage of leather in the industry. Removing restrictions
=== PAGE 143 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
123
on exports of leather would increase the incentives to invest in the Ethiopian 
leather supply chain. 
The government should pursue efforts to control cattle disease, a battle that, 
when won, will also beneﬁ t the dairy and meat-processing industries. A U.S. 
Agency for International Development (USAID) study shows that the infesta-
tion rate of ectoparasites could be substantially reduced from 90 to 5 percent 
with four treatments a year for each animal, costing about US$0.10 for all 
four treatments (USAID 2008). The total cost for such a program covering the 
whole country would be less than US$10 million a year, a modest amount in 
relation to the potential beneﬁ ts. As discussed in the section on agribusiness, 
promoting cross-breed cows and enabling the use of cattle as collateral would 
also increase the incentives and ﬁ nancial means of small farmers to access 
veterinary services. Facilitating access to rural land for good-practice animal 
farms would further stimulate the supply of quality leather. This should be 
done through a fully transparent and inclusive process to ensure that local 
communities beneﬁ t and environmental issues are resolved. 
To address the lesser constraints, several measures could be taken:
• Improve trade logistics. Improving trade logistics would further increase Ethi-
opia’s competitiveness in leather products by reducing production costs by 
as much as 5 percent (if leather is imported) and order-to-delivery delays by 
more than 30 days.
• Provide technical assistance to improve entrepreneurial skills in product design 
and factory ﬂ oor operations. As the experience of the Ramsay Shoe Fac-
tory shows, technical assistance to Ethiopian shoe manufacturers—in this 
instance, by the Indian Footwear Design and Development Institute—helped 
to improve labor efﬁ ciency as well as the quality and price of exportable shoes. 
• Facilitate the entry of leading investors in leather products. Interest is already 
high from both producers (ofﬁ cial Chinese policy now encourages domes-
tic companies to expand overseas investments, with leather products now 
becoming a sunset industry in China’s coastal cities) and global buyers (the 
leading U.S. importer of leather shoes is seeking to diversify away from 
China). This creates an opportunity to promote Ethiopia as a promising 
investment location for the global leather industry. To avoid rent-seeking 
behavior, interventions to attract investment should be available to all ﬁ rms 
seeking to enter the industry. 
• Develop plug-and-play industrial parks. One park should be developed next 
to Addis Ababa and one not too far from Djibouti (following an in-depth 
feasibility study) to help to address the missing middle and further improve 
trade logistics.
=== PAGE 144 ===
124 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Wood Products: Providing Technical Training and 
Developing Sustainable Wood Plantations
Ethiopia could become competitive in wood products by providing technical 
training to entrepreneurs and workers, making access to industrial land and 
ﬁ nance easier, and by facilitating the development of sustainable wood planta-
tions to take advantage of the country’s unique bamboo resources—the biggest 
bamboo endowment in Africa. 
Ethiopia’s Potential
Unlike apparel and leather, where the main opportunity is for Ethiopia to 
develop exports, the immediate opportunity in the wood product industry lies 
in the fast-growing domestic market for domestic fuel, construction materials, 
and furniture. The opportunity for job creation is more limited because labor 
productivity is very low (a ﬁ fth of Vietnam’s and a tenth of China’s on average). 
In the initial phase of manufacturing growth, this subsector’s potential seems 
to lie in import replacement rather than in exports. 
Fueled by strong domestic demand for wood construction materials and 
furniture, Ethiopia’s wood product industry currently employs more than 
40,000 workers, mostly in small, low-productivity informal ﬁ rms producing 
low-quality products for the domestic market. 
Main Constraints to Competitiveness
The cost of producing a wooden chair is more than twice as high in Ethiopia 
as in China and Vietnam for two main reasons. First, soft wood is much more 
expensive in Ethiopia than in China and Vietnam—a cubic meter of pine lum-
ber costs US$667 in Ethiopia compared to US$344 in China and US$275 in 
Tanzania. Second, labor productivity is very low, even in the larger ﬁ rms. Work-
ers produce 4.5 chairs a day in China, 1.9 in Vietnam, and only 0.3 in Ethiopia 
(0.5 in Tanzania and 0.4 in Zambia). Lower wages do not compensate for lower 
productivity, which is caused by the small scale of operations and low skills of 
managers and workers (the labor cost per chair in Ethiopia is US$10, compared 
with US$3 in China and Vietnam). 
The main constraints are as follows:
• Lack of organized supplies of domestic Ethiopian wood. The wood used in 
Ethiopia is either imported or from high-cost informal sources. 
• Lack of entrepreneurial and worker skills. The sector is dominated by micro, 
mostly informal, ﬁ rms and carpenters producing very low-value products, 
with a few medium-size companies catering to higher-value niches in the 
export and domestic markets. For ﬁ rms of all sizes, poor worker skills are
=== PAGE 145 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
125
reﬂ ected in labor productivity considerably lower than that of workers in 
China and Vietnam. Poor management of the production process is also 
reﬂ ected in high material waste compared to China and higher use of con-
sumables such as glues and varnish (table 8.1). 
• Difﬁ culties in access to land and ﬁ nance. Several furniture manufacturers in 
Addis Ababa said they were at maximum capacity in their current premises, 
but due to the fragmented land market they could not obtain affordable, 
convenient land to scale up production. 
Table 8.1 Benchmarking the Cost of Consumables per Chair in the Five Countries 
Country and consumable 
cost and use
Cost per kilogram 
(US$)
Grams per chair
Cost per chair 
(US$)
Ethiopia
Adhesives, glues
2.59
200
0.52
Varnish, ﬁ nishing oils
2.22
500
1.11
Other consumables
—
—
2.59
Total
—
—
4.22
Tanzania
Adhesives, glues
3.87
250
0.97
Varnish, ﬁ nishing oils
2.67
500
1.33
Other consumables
—
—
2.80
Total
—
—
5.10
Zambia
Adhesives, glues
5.85
250
1.46
Varnish, ﬁ nishing oils
3.47
500
1.74
Other consumables
—
—
1.10
Total
—
—
4.30
China
Adhesives, glues
2.21
 44
0.10
Varnish, ﬁ nishing oils
5.10
 50
0.25
Other consumables
—
—
0.16
Total
—
—
0.51
Vietnam
Adhesives, glues
3.24
 61
0.20
Varnish, ﬁ nishing oils
7.54
112
0.84
Other consumables
—
—
0.44
Total
—
—
1.48
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
Note: — = Not available.
=== PAGE 146 ===
126 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Recommendations to Increase Competitiveness
With sales of wood products oriented primarily toward domestic buyers and 
employment concentrated within small ﬁ rms, circumstances are quite different 
in this sector than in apparel and leather goods. We cannot expect medium- or 
large-scale, foreign-owned, export-oriented operations to play a lead role in 
elevating productivity and skills in the short term. Our main recommendations, 
to be pursued in parallel, are to undertake the following:
• Facilitate access to land and ﬁ nancing for sustainable private wood plantations 
of fast-growing species on degraded land close to the main urban centers. This 
would improve the quality of wood (such as dried and precut wood) and 
reduce its cost (via economies of scale and lower transportation costs) so 
long as it is not overtaxed. Carbon ﬁ nancing should be available for such 
schemes because this increases the afforested area. China, Vietnam, and Tan-
zania all have successful wood plantations. Facilitating access to land and 
ﬁ nance could encourage similar developments in Ethiopia. 
• Develop plug-and-play industrial parks. Operating in industrial parks would 
help the better small and medium enterprises to access utilities, land, ﬁ nance, 
and skills, with technical assistance programs for both owner-managers and 
workers.
• Improve trade logistics. Better logistics would reduce the cost of low-value 
imported wood by 20 percent, but imported wood would still be 50 percent 
more expensive than competitively produced domestic wood (low-value 
wood is a very low value-to-weight item). Improved trade logistics would 
also reduce the cost of other inputs that may not be competitively produced 
in Ethiopia (such as adhesives, varnish, and ﬁ nishing oils).
Metal Products: Reducing the Cost of Steel and Providing 
Technical Training
As in the case of wood products, Ethiopia’s competitiveness in metal products 
is constrained by poor skills and high input costs; steel costs 30 percent more 
than in China because it is imported and subject to import tariffs. With proven 
reserves of iron ore deposits and cheap hydro-energy, it might be feasible to 
develop a competitive steel industry in Ethiopia. 
Ethiopia’s Potential
Ethiopia exported US$41 million of steel products in 2009, while importing 
more than US$350 million, an imbalance that points to the possibility that 
domestic products can at least partially replace imports in metal products, a 
sector with a fast-growing domestic market. Informal micro ﬁ rms dominate the 
metal products industry in Ethiopia. Only one ﬁ rm produces crown corks (bot-
=== PAGE 147 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
127
tle caps); there is no domestic production of padlocks (both items are subjects 
of the comparative value chain analysis in Global Development Solutions 2011). 
Ethiopia could develop a competitive domestic industry in metal products:
• As in the apparel and leather subsectors, wages are low and productivity can 
be high. Despite obsolete equipment, Ethiopian workers achieved half the 
productivity of Chinese workers in the crown cork industry.
• Many metal products are heavy and bulky, with a low value-to-weight ratio, 
making imports relatively expensive (even with improved trade logistics).
• Iron ore deposits together with competitive sources of hydro-energy cre-
ate the possibility that Ethiopia could launch a competitive steel industry 
(although lack of scale and high cost of capital may stand in the way).
Main Constraints to Competitiveness
The main reason that the production costs of metal products are 20 percent 
higher in Ethiopia than in China is that the steel in Ethiopia is 30 percent more 
expensive (tin-free steel costs US$1,414 a ton in Ethiopia, US$1,106 in China). 
Steel has to be imported at high cost (like wood, it is a low value-to-weight item) 
and is subject to a 10 percent import tariff.
• High import tariffs, compounded by poor trade logistics, are the main driver of 
the high price of imported steel.
Many of the secondary constraints affecting small and medium enterprises 
in metal products are similar to those in wood manufacturing: 
• Small and medium enterprises cannot expand because of restrictions in acquir-
ing formal ﬁ nance and land. One medium-size manufacturer of metal roof-
ing and construction materials made several attempts to invest in forward 
and backward integration. Despite securing commitments to invest from 
foreign partners, the projects failed to take off partly due to difﬁ culties in 
gaining permission for shared equity with foreign partners. Investors see 
the potential for growth, but access to ﬁ nance is a constraint on efforts to 
upgrade the industry.
• Lack of entrepreneurial and worker skills is evident in a 32 percent metal scrap 
rate, much higher than the 5 percent in other countries. Equipment in Ethio-
pia is obsolete, reﬂ ecting the fact that ﬁ rm owners and managers are not 
exposed to global competition (the crown cork producer is the sole supplier 
to the brewery; see Global Development Solutions 2011). 
Recommendations to Increase Competitiveness
Our main recommendations for the metal products sector are the following:
• Reduce the 10 percent import tariff on steel (with little ﬁ scal impact)
=== PAGE 148 ===
128 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
• Improve trade logistics (along the lines discussed above), as this could save 
another 7 percent on the cost of imported steel
• Promote the exploitation of iron ore deposits and conduct an in-depth feasibility 
study to assess the potential competitiveness of a domestic steel industry. 
Agribusiness: Reforming Key Agricultural Input and Output 
Markets and Facilitating Access to Land and Finance
To unleash the potential of agribusiness, the government should reform agricul-
tural input and output markets, enable the use of land and cattle as collateral, 
and facilitate access to rural land for investors through a transparent and inclu-
sive process beneﬁ ting local communities. 
Ethiopia’s Potential
As shown by the success of the Ethiopian coffee and cut-ﬂ ower industries, Ethi-
opia’s agribusiness potential is great for both the domestic and export markets. 
Vietnam created 450,000 direct jobs in the agribusiness industry, and Ethiopia 
has the potential to do the same.
The industry’s potential stems from the following:
• Low wages combined with good labor productivity result in competitive 
wheat-milling processing costs (see Global Development Solutions 2011)
• Exceptional and varied climatic and soil conditions for growing a variety 
of crops, including cotton, wheat, coffee, and fruits, that are suitable for 
exports, industrial processing, or both
• The second largest livestock population of Africa (behind Sudan)
• Large tracts of unused arable land and low yields on cultivated land
• Proximity to the Gulf, a large importer of food products.
Yet millions of Ethiopians continue to depend on emergency food aid, and 
Ethiopia imported US$368 million of cereals in 2009. The agribusiness industry 
is underdeveloped, with only 46,000 workers, mostly in large ﬁ rms (except in 
the dairy industry).
Main Constraints to Competitiveness
In the agribusiness sector, as in apparel, leather, and wood products, the main 
constraint is the high cost and low quality of agricultural inputs—an ironic cir-
cumstance given the advantage of favorable soil and climatic conditions. A ton 
of wheat costs US$330 in Ethiopia, compared with about US$200 in China and 
Vietnam. The quality of milk is low in Ethiopia (due to poor animal husbandry 
and transport conditions), and the cost is high (US$0.37 a liter compared with
=== PAGE 149 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
129
US$0.13 in New Zealand and US$0.22 in Vietnam). The analysis of the main 
constraints on Ethiopia’s agribusiness industry is based mostly on the detailed 
comparative value chain analysis of the wheat ﬂ our and dairy subindustries 
(Global Development Solutions 2011).
Various distortions are evident in the agricultural input and output markets: 
• Shortages of high-yielding seeds due to inefﬁ ciencies in the government-run 
seed production and distribution systems as well as delays in the certiﬁ cation 
of imported seeds result in unnecessarily low crop yields and therefore high 
unit costs, which extinguish the prospects for potentially viable development 
of downstream processing operations. 
• A ﬁ xed-price system in the dairy sector removes incentives for dairy farm-
ers to expand production or upgrade technology. The average dairy farm in 
Ethiopia has fewer than 10 animals, but dairy farms in China and Vietnam 
have hundreds of cows under a single operation.
• More generally, price caps on key food items may protect low-income con-
sumers in the short run (with the risk of shortages and high prices in the 
black market), but restrict private investment in the long run. 
Access to large areas of land for large-scale farming is restricted due to the 
conﬂ uence of traditional rights with government control of land, so land trans-
actions are lengthy, costly, and risky.
Neither agricultural land nor cattle can be used as collateral for loans, pre-
venting farmers from formal ﬁ nance to increase productivity and expand pro-
duction. Only 5 percent of the cows in Ethiopia are high-yield cross-breed cows, 
which produce much more milk for longer periods (table 8.2). This low yield 
increases the milking, collecting, husbandry, and overhead costs (including vet-
erinary services, which are a ﬁ xed cost per cow). It is not economic to invest in 
efﬁ cient milking equipment and veterinary services for low-yield cows. This 
leads to a cost penalty of about US$0.10 per liter of milk (a 50 percent increase 
over the cost of milk in Vietnam). Cross-breed cows can be obtained through 
artiﬁ cial insemination or can be bought at a cost of about US$1,000, which 
represents a capital cost of about US$0.02 per liter (with a 15-year life expec-
tancy). They also require more animal husbandry (cross breeds are less resistant 
to disease) and much more feed than local breeds. 
Table 8.2 Attributes of Local and Cross-Breed Cows
Attribute
Local cow
Cross-breed cow
Fat composition (percent)
4.5–5.0
3.5–3.7
Lactation period (days)
239
300
Milk yield (liters a day)
1.3
12
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
=== PAGE 150 ===
130 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Recommendations to Unleash Ethiopia’s Potential 
The recommended policy interventions aim to create incentives to improve 
productivity and ensure that farmers have access to technical assistance, land, 
and ﬁ nance to make improvements.
• Review government regulations and direct involvement. The objective would 
be to reform or eliminate ofﬁ cial mechanisms that stiﬂ e incentives to invest 
in new types of enterprises (large-scale cultivation) or in efforts to upgrade 
existing operations with improved seeds or cattle. The foregoing review 
repeatedly highlights government-imposed restrictions on agricultural 
output and input markets as obstacles to realizing potentially very large 
increases in production, employment, exports, and the supply of materials 
to several promising light manufacturing sectors.
• Facilitate access to agricultural land for good-practice investors. Good-practice 
new entrants can bring major positive externalities, as with the cut-ﬂ ower 
industry, which took off after the Ethiopian government helped the ﬁ rst rose 
farm to obtain access to 7 hectares of land. This should be done through a 
fully transparent and inclusive process to ensure that local communities ben-
eﬁ t and environmental issues are addressed. 
• Allow land and cattle to be used as collateral. Such reforms could be piloted in 
some key locations ﬁ rst. Promoting cross-breed cows and enabling the use 
of cattle as collateral would increase the incentives and ﬁ nancial means for 
farmers to access veterinary services. 
• Establish plug-and-play industrial parks. The creation of such parks would help 
leading agribusiness enterprises to enter the industry and better- managed 
small and medium enterprises to access utilities, land, ﬁ nance, and skills.
Synthesis across the Five Subsectors in Light Manufacturing 
This section summarizes the potential and key constraints of Ethiopia across 
the ﬁ ve studied subsectors and identiﬁ es policy priorities.
Ethiopia’s Potential
Ethiopia can become globally competitive in the apparel, leather product, and 
agribusiness industries and compete with imports in the wood and metal prod-
uct industries, for ﬁ ve reasons:
• Very low wages combined with high trainability of workers
• Potential access to competitive sources of key inputs
=== PAGE 151 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
131
• Access to a state-of-the-art container port in Djibouti
• A large and growing domestic market and proximity to large export markets
• Duty-free access to EU and U.S. markets.
Ethiopia thus shares many characteristics with Vietnam, where millions of 
productive jobs were created in light manufacturing over the past 20 years.
Main Constraints to Competitiveness 
Across the ﬁ ve industries that form the focus of this study, policy issues in input 
industries, particularly in agriculture, are crucial in limiting Ethiopia’s ability to 
activate its latent competitive advantage in major areas of light manufacturing, 
notably apparel, leather, wood products, and agribusiness. Poor trade logistics, 
both within Ethiopia and across its borders, raise the costs of accessing exter-
nal markets for both imports and exports, exacerbating the substantial nega-
tive consequences of insufﬁ cient access to inexpensive, good-quality domestic 
inputs. In addition, difﬁ culties in accessing land, ﬁ nance, and skills obstruct 
efforts to create and expand small and medium enterprises in sectors in which 
Ethiopia enjoys a latent comparative advantage.
Government actions are needed in several areas, either to rectify existing 
policy distortions or to create public goods needed for private sector growth. 
Among the former are reduction or elimination of tariffs on inputs such as 
fabric, leather, and steel; reduction of regulations that limit land acquisition; 
allowance of undeveloped land, cattle, or equipment to be used as collateral 
against loans; facilitation of entry by leading foreign companies; removal of 
restrictions on imported seeds and foreign exchange; removal of restrictions 
that allow banks (apparently government-owned banks) to overcharge on let-
ters of credit and trade documentation. They also include the removal of price 
controls on dairy products and breaking up of the monopoly on road transport. 
Among the latter is strengthening veterinary services such as the control of 
ectoparasites. 
The most important constraints vary by subsector and are often speciﬁ c to 
the subsector (table 8.3). 
Consistent with the traditional agenda for the investment climate, many of 
the policy recommendations offered here seek to promote competition and 
reduce transaction costs (via improved trade logistics and lower import tar-
iffs). The detailed subsector-level diagnostics and cross-country comparisons 
make it possible to focus on a small number of quite speciﬁ c policy recommen-
dations for each light manufacturing subsector. Some key recommendations, 
often overlooked, are related to input industries, such as the need to develop 
sustainable wood plantations.
=== PAGE 152 ===
132 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Reforms in agriculture, where Ethiopia has an untapped comparative advan-
tage, are critical to improving the competitiveness of four light manufacturing 
subsectors (apparel, leather products, wood products, and agribusiness). The 
agricultural reform agenda deserves its own in-depth study and discussion, but 
the necessary reforms fall into two broad categories: liberalizing agricultural 
input and output markets and facilitating access to rural land for good-practice 
investors. These important reforms could be initially focused and piloted on a 
few key products and locations. And facilitating the import of key inputs that 
cannot be produced competitively in Ethiopia should be addressed by both 
lowering import tariffs and improving trade logistics. 
Developing plug-and-play industrial parks and collateral markets is impor-
tant for all subsectors. Until now, foreign-run industrial parks have been set up 
in Ethiopia primarily for the beneﬁ t of Chinese ﬁ rms. But the government has 
identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve sites to develop as industrial parks. Taking early steps to establish 
clear objectives for future industrial parks can facilitate the development of a 
suitable institutional framework that will smooth the path to capitalizing on 
Ethiopia’s latent comparative advantage in light manufacturing. 
It is also critical to encourage foreign direct investment (FDI) from lead-
ing foreign investors in the subsectors with high potential for exports (apparel, 
leather products, and agribusiness; see box 8.2). But to attract capable, expe-
rienced, and well-ﬁ nanced overseas investors, the government of Ethiopia 
will have to provide convincing evidence that reforms are under way and that 
completion of the reform agenda will continue to occupy a leading position in 
ofﬁ cial development efforts. 
Table 8.3 Constraints in Ethiopia, by Importance, Size of Firm, and Sector
Input
industries
Land
Finance
Entrepre-
neurial
skills 
Worker 
skills
Trade 
logistics
Apparel
Smaller
Important
Critical
Critical
Important
Important
Large
Important
Important
Critical
Leather products
Smaller
Critical
Critical
Critical
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Wood products
Smaller
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Metal products
Smaller
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Large
Critical
Important
Important
Important
Important
Agribusiness
Smaller
Critical
Critical
Critical
Important
Large
Critical
Critical
Important
Source: Authors
Note: Blank cells are not a priority.
=== PAGE 153 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
133
B OX 8.2
The Role of FDI in Chinese Manufacturing and 
Apparel Industries
Many studies have documented the signiﬁ cant role of FDI in economic development 
around the world. The experience of numerous economies—including the United 
States; Canada; Australia; Taiwan, China; Singapore; and, most recently, China and 
Vietnam—shows how foreign investment has spurred the growth of output, invest-
ment, employment, productivity, and exports. FDI contributes to the structural transfor-
mation of host economies, to technology adoption, and to industrial upgrading among 
domestic ﬁ rms. FDI enables host nations to gain increased access to world markets for 
goods, technology, and capital. Among recent studies, Chandra and Kolavalli (2006) 
provide evidence that attracting FDI has been an important strategy in technological 
adaptation; Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2010) ﬁ nd that trade volumes are highly 
and positively correlated with foreign investment inﬂ ows.
 FDI’s place, however, is more pronounced in some industries than in others. FDI 
made particularly large contributions to the recent expansion of both China’s and Viet-
nam’s apparel industries. China’s “open-door” policy, which marked the beginning of 
a strong relationship between foreign and domestic investors, helped China to become 
the top host of foreign capital among developing nations and the biggest exporter of 
many manufactured products, including apparel. Shenzhen’s astonishing transforma-
tion from a sleepy village to a central component of China’s industrial export explosion 
epitomizes the developmental potential of foreign investment. In 1980 China selected 
Shenzhen as one of its ﬁ rst special economic zones. Shenzhen’s location at China’s bor-
der with Hong Kong SAR, China, and close to Taiwan, China, and Macao SAR, China, 
facilitated FDI from overseas Chinese and provided easy access to the deepwater port in 
Hong Kong SAR, China. Despite initial difﬁ culties—concerns over rigidities and delays 
led early investors to minimize their interaction with China’s domestic economy—Shen-
zhen rapidly emerged as a magnet for overseas investment and an export powerhouse 
in a wide array of light industry trades. Three decades later, Shenzhen remains promi-
nent in both manufacturing and exports, with production migrating rapidly from the 
initial focus on low-end, labor-intensive goods toward higher value added, technologi-
cally sophisticated industries such as information and communications gear. 
As of 2010 China’s stock of inbound FDI, as tabulated by the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development, amounted to US$578.8 billion, and annual 
inﬂ ow of FDI was US$105.7 billion.1 Foreign ownership is welcomed in many (but by 
no means all) manufacturing industries, including apparel FDI clusters along  China’s 
east coast, particularly in Shanghai municipality and in Guangdong and Jiangsu prov-
inces (National Bureau of Statistics of China 2011, 256). In the past decade, China has 
become the largest exporter of textiles and apparel, with 2010 exports of US$206.5 bil-
lion accounting for one-third of global trade in textiles and apparel, which reached 
US$612 billion in value.2 Between 1995 and 1999, 20 percent of all textile ﬁ rms in 
China had some form of FDI. These accounted for only one-ﬁ fth of the number of
=== PAGE 154 ===
134 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
ﬁ rms but for twice the sales volume of purely domestic ﬁ rms. They employed roughly 
as many workers as domestic ﬁ rms, implying that on average they were larger in size. 
Similarly, value added per worker in ﬁ rms with FDI was double the comparable ﬁ gure 
for purely domestic producers, in part because FDI ﬁ rms employed more capital per 
worker (Hu and Jefferson 2002).
Recent research also shows support for FDI’s positive role in the development of 
China’s domestic industries. Du, Harrison, and Jefferson (2011) ﬁ nd that FDI generates 
positive productivity spillovers through contacts between foreign afﬁ liates and their 
local clients in upstream or downstream sectors.
There is also evidence that successful industrial policies can attract more FDI, which 
in turn generates higher growth. Alfaro and Charlton (2007) ﬁ nd that FDI inﬂ ows are 
likely to be higher in targeted sectors and that FDI in these sectors generates higher 
growth. Du, Harrison, and Jefferson (2011) show that foreign investors targeted via 
special Chinese tax incentives generated signiﬁ cantly higher productivity growth rela-
tive to other kinds of FDI.
These and other researchers highlight the importance of supportive policies to cre-
ate a suitable enabling environment as a means of attracting FDI and then enlarging 
the resulting spin-off of beneﬁ ts to domestic producers. Areas in which policy can 
improve the prospects for attracting and beneﬁ ting from FDI include human capital 
(Borensztein, De Gregorio, and Lee 1998), developed ﬁ nancial markets (Alfaro and 
others 2004), and openness to trade (Balasubramanyam, Salisu, and Sapsford 1996).
Implementing Reform
Implementing a reform agenda to address the main constraints in the sectors 
with the most potential will require strong and sustained commitment from the 
top levels of government. Investors need to be conﬁ dent that they are not under 
threat of government expropriation. 
It is also important to determine whether a country has a comparative advan-
tage in a given subsector. A simple way to do this is through domestic resource 
cost (DRC) ratios, which measure a country’s comparative advantage in an 
industry (Bruno 1972; Bhagwati and Srinivasan 1980; Pack 1974, 1987). Because 
of its close links to the concept of effective protection, DRC ratios are also widely 
used as an index of economic efﬁ ciency in restrictionist trade regimes. 
A DRC value less than 1 indicates that the cost of the domestic resources 
to produce a unit of the product is less than the potential foreign exchange 
earnings from exporting it. That is, the country has a comparative advantage, 
and there is a rationale for government to foster its exports. Similarly, a DRC 
value greater than 1 indicates that the cost of the domestic resources spent in 
producing a good for the domestic market is more than the foreign exchange 
spent importing it. That is, the country does not have a comparative advantage. 
If the government is supporting import-substituting policies for this product, 
it should discontinue them.
=== PAGE 155 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
135
For industries that pass the DRC test, whether for export or for import sub-
stitution, it would be useful to follow through with value chain studies to map 
constraints into policy recommendations and to identify exactly what it will 
take for the government to promote expansion of that industry. Table 8.4 shows 
the DRC ratio for each of the products for which the comparative value chain 
analysis was done. On the basis of the DRC ratio and the other criteria, the 
sector priorities, in decreasing order, are leather goods, agribusiness, apparel, 
metal, and wood products. 
To attract both domestic and investors to light manufacturing in Ethiopia, 
the Ethiopian government should put in place a dedicated high-level imple-
mentation task team—together with transparent, inclusive, and professional 
processes—to develop and implement the reform program. 
Botswana, Cape Verde, Malaysia, Mauritius, and Taiwan, China, did this at 
the outset of their economic transformation (Criscuolo and Palmade 2008). 
The combination of skills, access, and resources gave these teams the inﬂ uence 
to steer an ambitious (yet focused) policy agenda in the face of opposing inter-
ests. Such teams have typically been charged with designing and updating the 
strategy, engaging and negotiating with potential leading investors, mobilizing 
the support of development partners, supporting and monitoring key govern-
ment initiatives, keeping government leaders informed and committed, and 
breeding the next generation of leaders. 
The policy approach in this chapter proposes active government support to 
the light manufacturing sector through means such as targeted policy reforms 
(especially in key input industries) as well as the provision of public goods such 
as “plug-and-play” industrial zones, technical assistance for entrepreneurs and 
workers, control of cattle diseases, and information on costs for potential for-
eign investors. This approach aims to foster competition, expand the capacity of 
all ﬁ rms to compete, and level the playing ﬁ eld between types of ﬁ rms. Because 
any active government policy creates the opportunity for rents or policy-
induced proﬁ ts, policy implementation should ensure that the beneﬁ ciaries are 
Table 8.4 Domestic Resource Cost Ratios in Ethiopia
Product
DRC ratio
Polo shorts
1.12
Leather loafers
0.78
Wooden chairs
4.16/1.73
Crown cork
–5.76
Wheat milling
0.93
Boxer briefs
Slightly below 1.0 (ERR)
Leather gloves
Above 1.0 (ERR)
Source: Global Development Solutions 2011.
=== PAGE 156 ===
136 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
determined by market forces and not by the special interests of government 
ofﬁ cials or rent-seeking entrepreneurs. 
The policy measures proposed here minimize the rent-seeking opportunities 
in implementation for ﬁ ve reasons: 
• First, because the proposed approach and the sector-speciﬁ c support are 
focused on sectors consistent with Ethiopia’s latent comparative advantage, 
the extent of government support can be limited and rapidly scaled back as 
new information arrives. 
• Second, to limit the extent and cost of rent seeking, policies should focus on 
providing public goods that provide widespread beneﬁ ts. 
• Third, the reform should begin with pilot studies and be continually revised 
and updated. In addition, implementation should be decentralized, to 
enhance proximity to the private sector, increase accountability, and foster 
competition among local governments. 
• Fourth, the government must be ready to withdraw support for industries 
that fail to deliver anticipated gains. 
• Fifth, one of the best ways the government can facilitate robust private sector 
growth is by maintaining a stable and conducive macroeconomic environ-
ment and by ensuring that natural resources are well managed. 
Political Economy Issues
Economic policies have distributional impact. Most policy choices create dis-
tributional conﬂ ict—beneﬁ ting some and hurting others, vested interests in 
particular. The losers, if they are organized better and have stronger inﬂ uence 
on the governments than the winners, can stop the reforms or force reversal 
of policies. Therefore, in designing and implementing reform programs, it is 
essential to identify the winners and losers and develop a strategy to reconcile 
the differences and elicit a favorable political response.
In the program recommended here, most of the policy actions would result 
in short- and longer-term gains for a large group of Ethiopians. In particu-
lar, improving trade logistics, developing industrial parks, enabling the use of 
land and cattle as collateral, controlling cattle disease, reducing the fuel tax and 
import duties on trucks and spare parts, and facilitating development of com-
petitive domestic input industries would create large gains for a wide range of 
interest groups. Losses for some segments of business are expected from liberal-
ization of imports of apparel inputs and leather (local producers of these prod-
ucts) and elimination of export bans on leather and cotton (local processors 
of these inputs) and price controls on some food products. But these measures 
would create a large number of winners too. For example, elimination of price
=== PAGE 157 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
137
caps on some food products would hurt some consumers but beneﬁ t producers, 
thus encouraging production and employment.
Even if both the number of beneﬁ ciaries and the scale of beneﬁ ts would far 
exceed the number of losers and the magnitude of losses, as with the measures 
proposed in this report, favorable cost-beneﬁ t ratios do not guarantee smooth 
passage and implementation of the reform program. Mitigating this risk calls 
for consideration of several dimensions of program design:
• Analyze the impact of proposed reforms. The government should make every 
effort to mobilize support through public discussion and facilitate the cre-
ation of the broadest possible coalition in favor of reform. A gradual process 
of coalition building, especially among national and regional policy elites, 
was a key ingredient in China’s eventual decision to adopt a “socialist market 
economy with Chinese characteristics,” which represented a massive shift 
from the previous plan-oriented regime (Shirk 1993; Naughton 2008).
• Structure reforms as a package designed to mobilize sufﬁ ciently broad support 
and counter potential opposition. Phased implementation of some measures 
(import liberalization) might give potential losers time to adjust, thus reduc-
ing their losses and possibly muting their opposition to a reform package.
• Leverage donor support. Ethiopian manufacturing industries receive support 
from several donors. The German Development Bank (KfW), through the 
Engineering Capacity Building project, provides support to manufacturing 
industries similar to that of the World Bank’s factory ﬂ oor–level interven-
tions to improve product quality and productivity by funding foreign techni-
cians. It also supports market linkages, particularly to the EU and Germany. 
The Japan International Cooperation Agency provides support to about 30 
medium and small enterprises and introduces the Kaizen system of continu-
ous monitoring of productivity and quality improvement efforts, while the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization provides support for 
benchmarking studies, particularly for the leather sector. The USAID sup-
ports market linkages for industries attempting to export to the U.S. market 
through fair trade participation and arranges direct buyer-seller linkages. 
The proposed program of reforms is sharply focused and should therefore 
be ﬁ scally manageable because its recommendations are few in number, are 
speciﬁ c, and can be packaged and prioritized along the most promising sub-
sectors (with the help of development partners). Table 8.5 lays out the costs 
and feasibility of this report’s major recommendations. Although the proposed 
policies are designed to limit rent seeking, parts of the government may ﬁ nd 
ways to favor connected ﬁ rms and extract rents from others. To avoid this, it is 
essential to secure and sustain the commitment of the top level of government 
to the growth and jobs agenda and to implement controls and incentives that 
will assure proper implementation.
=== PAGE 158 ===
138 
 
Table 8.5 Estimated Fiscal Costs and Political Economy Feasibility of the Proposed Measures
Measure
Fiscal cost
Political economy feasibility
Fully liberalize the import and export 
of leather.
Import duties on leather represent less than $1 million a year. 
The political risk is limited if the two measures are taken simultane-
ously: liberalized imports will help shoe manufacturers faced with 
leather shortages, while liberalized exports will ensure that tanneries 
get the world market price for their leather. 
Give immediate and free access to 
foreign exchange (start with apparel 
and leather products).
Giving up the 1.5% foreign exchange fee charged to the 
importers of inputs for the apparel and leather industries 
would represent a ﬁ scal loss of about US$500,000 a year. 
The apparel industry currently exports US$8 million, of which 
US$6 million represents reexport of imported materials (the 
ﬁ scal loss on their imports would thus be US$120,000). 
Domestic apparel ﬁ rms produce about US$50 million worth 
of apparel but import a much lower proportion (about 20 per-
cent) because they rely on low-quality domestic textiles (the 
ﬁ scal loss on their imports would thus be about US$150,000). 
The numbers in the leather product industry would be similar 
in magnitude.
Providing immediate access to currencies for these sectors should 
carry no cost, because these sectors have the potential to become very 
large net currency earners. This could be done by setting up a special 
reserve for the two sectors with controls to prevent use of the reserves 
for other purposes.
Establish green channels at customs 
(start with apparel and leather 
products).
The primary cost would be for technical assistance, which 
could be ﬁ nanced with the support of development partners.
This has been done many times before. There is no obvious political 
economy challenge.
Reduce the cost of letters of credit 
(start with apparel and leather 
products).
To be determined following in-depth diagnosis of costs; cost 
would be limited if the issue is related to some regulations or 
to the lack of competition in the banking sector.
Trade ﬁ nance is a major source of income for commercial banks in 
Ethiopia. The banking industry would need to be persuaded and 
shown that the expected increase in the number and value of letters 
of credit would more than compensate for the reduction in fees; this 
could be ﬁ rst demonstrated in the context of the apparel and leather 
product subsectors, where the measure would have the most impact 
(the number of letters of credit issued by the banks in the apparel and 
leather industries is currently small).
=== PAGE 159 ===
 
 
139
Eliminate import tariffs on inputs for 
all ﬁ rms (start with apparel, leather, 
and agribusiness).
The input components of individual subsectors are identiﬁ ed 
from data in the customs classiﬁ cation. Total import duty of 
the ﬁ ve subsectors amounted to Br 855 million (US$50 mil-
lion) in 2009/10 (less than 2 percent of total tax revenue), 
of which more than 90 percent comes from the metal and 
garment industries. Removing import duties on inputs for 
the light manufacturing sector would not cost more than 2 
percent of total tax revenue, which could easily be made up 
by imposing an excise tax if needed. Limiting the measure (at 
least initially) to the garment, leather, and agribusiness indus-
tries (where it would have the most beneﬁ ts) would cost less 
than 1 percent of total tax revenues. 
Import tariffs protect domestic suppliers. There is potential for domes-
tic producers to lose out in the short run. The case needs to be made 
to show that all will beneﬁ t in the long run and that, if necessary, par-
allel interventions to support productivity improvements in domestic 
production will balance the loss to local farmers. 
Reduce import tariffs on steel and 
investigate the feasibility of exploit-
ing iron ore deposits (metal product 
value chain).
The reduction of import tariffs on steel will have a small ﬁ scal 
impact.
To be studied.
Enable the use of land, machines, 
cattle, and outputs as collateral 
(all subsectors).
The cost would mostly be for technical assistance to improve 
the regulatory frameworks and collateral registries, which 
could be ﬁ nanced with the support of development partners.
This effort would leverage the successful reform that gave farmers the 
right to rent and inherit their land; the government could authorize 
the use of transferrable long-term lease rights, and such reforms could 
be ﬁ rst piloted in key locations.
Control cattle diseases.
The cost of combating ectoparasites is less than US$10 mil-
lion (USAID). Promoting cross-breed cows and enabling the 
use of cattle as collateral would increase the incentives and 
ﬁ nancial means for farmers to access veterinary services.
The approach needs to be regional, as cattle cross borders.
Support entrepreneurial and worker 
skills.
The cost of providing management and technical training 
is high initially because expatriate trainers are needed. It 
declines signiﬁ cantly once local trainers become available. 
The cost of connecting clusters to utilities and providing them 
with the space to grow should, as for industrial parks, be a 
ﬁ nancing cost because small and medium enterprises should 
be charged only for recurring costs. Again, development part-
ners might help with the ﬁ nancing. World-class, experienced 
providers of training should be leveraged, together with state-
of-the-art methods of evaluation (randomized).
No obvious political economy challenge.
(table continued next page)
=== PAGE 160 ===
140 
 
Measure
Fiscal cost
Political economy feasibility
Facilitate private sector investments 
in key agricultural input markets such 
as hybrid seeds and fertilizers.
Liberalizing the markets for key seeds and fertilizers could 
reduce the amounts spent by the government on credit guar-
antees, subsidies, and distribution.
This would go against the interests of the state-controlled companies 
that control the seeds and fertilizer markets; focusing or piloting such 
reforms on a few key crops where the reforms would have the most 
beneﬁ t would help to alleviate resistance. 
Facilitate access to rural land to 
promote competitive and sustain-
able farms, cattle ranches, and wood 
plantations. 
Facilitating access to land should generate (local) government 
revenues because the private sector should be asked to pay 
a land lease. The ﬁ nancing cost of connecting the land to the 
road network and utilities could be absorbed by the private 
investor in exchange for a reduction in the land lease. Carbon 
ﬁ nance should be made available, since wood plantations on 
degraded land would increase the forest area. 
The government has already earmarked 3 million hectares of rural 
land for private investors. This is an extremely politically, socially, and 
environmentally sensitive topic that will require the government to rely 
on a fully transparent, inclusive, and highly professional process (prin-
ciples for responsible investments in agriculture are being developed 
by the international community). 
Extend the rural food safety nets 
to vulnerable urban populations 
as an alternative to price caps and 
export bans. 
Removing the price caps on key food items could have ﬁ scal 
implications because it may require targeted support to the 
poorest—for example, by extending the rural safety net to 
vulnerable urban populations (to be studied in detail). 
Such reforms can be politically and socially sensitive. Lifting the export 
ban on cotton would beneﬁ t millions of farmers, but go against the 
short-term interest of textile mills. Extending the rural safety net to 
vulnerable urban populations would also need to be considered in the 
context of the food security agenda.
Develop plug-and-play industrial 
parks (would beneﬁ t all subsectors); 
start with one in Addis Ababa and 
conduct a feasibility study for one 
much closer to Djibouti (for example, 
in Dire Dawa). 
Because tenants would cover the operating and maintenance 
costs of the parks, the ﬁ scal cost is the ﬁ nancing cost of 
developing the park (about US$30 million for a 100-hectare 
park, which can accommodate 50,000 workers). As in China 
and Vietnam, private developers (including foreign ones) and 
banks could help to ﬁ nance the parks.
The government already has a policy to facilitate access to industrial 
land for exporters in preferred industries (which include leather prod-
ucts, apparel, and agribusiness). The government is also engaged in 
developing industrial parks. 
Facilitate the entry of leading 
investors along the value chains 
(start with apparel, leather, and 
agribusiness), once a critical mass 
of the measures listed above begins 
to take shape.
Strategy should be to design interventions that deliver beneﬁ ts to the 
widest possible array of potential entrants in the subsector. 
Source: Authors.
Note: Measures with significant short-term impact are listed first.
Table 8.5 (continued)
=== PAGE 161 ===
ETHIOPIA AS EXEMPLAR 
 
141
Notes
 1. Investment data from http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite_dir/docs/wir11_fs_ 
cn_en.pdf.
 2. For Chinese data, see http://www.21tradenet.com/news_2011-1-11/83167.htm. 
For global trade total, see http://www.salisonline.org/market-research/trends-in-
world-textile-and-clothing-trade-200910-edition/.
References
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. 2004. “FDI 
and Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets.” Journal of International 
Economics 64 (1): 89–112. 
Alfaro, Laura, and Andrew Charlton. 2007. “Growth and the Quality of Foreign Direct 
Investment: Is All FDI Equal?” CEP Discussion Paper 830, Centre for Economic Per-
formance, London School of Economics and Political Science, London.
Balasubramanyam, V. N., M. Salisu, and David Sapsford. 1996. “Foreign Direct Invest-
ment and Growth in EP and IS Countries.” Economic Journal 106 (434): 92–105. 
Bhagwati, Jagdish N., and T. N. Srinivasan. 1980. “Domestic Resource Costs, Effective 
Rates of Protection, and Project Analysis in Tariff-Distorted Economies.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 94 (1): 205–09. 
Borensztein, Eduardo, Jose De Gregorio, and J-W. Lee. 1998. “How Does Foreign Di-
rect Investment Affect Economic Growth?” Journal of International Economics 45 (1): 
115–35.
Bruno, Michael. 1972. “Domestic Resource Costs and Effective Protection: Clariﬁ cation 
and Synthesis.” Journal of Political Economy 80 (1): 16–33.
Chandra, Vandana, and Shashi Kolavalli. 2006. “Technology, Adaptation, and Exports: 
How Some Countries Got It Right.” In Technology, Adaptation and Exports, ed., Van-
dana Chandra. Washington, DC: World Bank.
 Criscuolo, Alberto, and Vincent Palmade. 2008. “Reform Teams.” Viewpoint Note 318, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Du, Luosha, Ann Harrison, and Gary Jefferson. 2011. “Do Institutions Matter for FDI 
Spillovers? The Implications of China’s ‘Special Characteristics.’” NBER Working 
Paper 16767, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Simon Quinn. 2011. “Results from a Quantitative Survey.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at 
http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Harrison, Ann, and Andres Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Indus-
trial Policy for Developing Countries.” In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 5 of 
Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig eds., 4039–214. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hu, Albert, and Gary Jefferson. 2002. “FDI Impact and Spillover: Evidence from China’s 
Electronic and Textile Industries.” World Economy 25 (8): 1063–76.
=== PAGE 162 ===
142 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. 2010. Growth and Transformation Plan 
2010/11–2014/15 Volume 1: Main Text. Addis Ababa: Government of Ethiopia. http://
www.mofed.gov.et/English/Resources/Documents/GTP%20English2.pdf.
National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2011. China Statistical Yearbook 2010. Beijing: 
China Statistics Press.
Naughton, Barry. 2008. “A Political Economy of China’s Economic Transition.” In 
 China’s Great Economic Transformation, ed. Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski. 
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Pack, Howard. 1974. “The Employment-Output Trade-Off in LDC’s: A Microeconomic 
Approach.” Oxford Economic Papers, New Series 26 (3, November): 388–404.
———. 1987. Productivity, Technology, and Industrial Development: A Case Study in Tex-
tiles. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
———. 1988. “Industrialization and Trade.” In Handbook of Development Econom-
ics, Vol. 1, ed. Hollis Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, ch. 9, 334–72. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland. 
Shirk, Susan L. 1993. The Political Logic of Economic Reform in China. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
USAID (U.S. Agency for International Development). 2008. “Success Story: Ethiopians 
Learning to Fight Ectoparasites.” Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis, USAID, 
Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 163 ===
Annex
This study aims to develop practical insights to help some African countries to 
become competitive in light manufacturing. This requires understanding why 
light manufacturing has been slow to grow in African countries but has taken 
off in other countries with similar development levels and investment climate 
indicators. It also requires understanding what strategies have been pursued by 
successful countries that not too long ago were at a similar development level 
and how such strategies could be adapted to African countries while fully rec-
ognizing their special circumstances. 
The study aims to answer the following questions:
• Is there potential for light manufacturing in Africa? And if so, why, under 
generally similar constraints, are light manufacturing products that require 
fairly simple technologies and less-skilled labor produced and even exported 
by countries in all regions of the world except Africa, where they are not even 
produced for the domestic market? 
• What are the critical constraints facing African ﬁ rms? How have ﬁ rms devised 
institutions and arrangements to circumvent some of these constraints? 
• What are some practical policies that other countries have used to help ﬁ rms 
to overcome the identiﬁ ed constraints, jump-start light manufacturing, and 
facilitate their transformation into modern economies? 
Industry and Country Focus
The study focuses on ﬁ ve light manufacturing industries that are basic, simple, 
and labor intensive: agribusiness, leather goods, wood processing and wood 
products, simple metal products, and apparel.
Three countries in Africa were chosen for the study: Ethiopia, Tanzania, and 
Zambia. All three have been spared recent conﬂ icts and experienced a degree 
of political stability over the years; such peace and stability are needed for the 
development of light manufacturing. Ethiopia was selected as the ﬁ rst case 
study for several reasons. It is among the largest African countries with relative 
The Study’s Objectives and Methods
=== PAGE 164 ===
144 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
political stability. Like many other African countries, it is landlocked. And its 
government has emphasized industrial growth as a pillar for the country’s over-
all development. Tanzania has a long tradition in manufacturing, while Zambia 
has experienced similar problems with industrialization as many mineral-based 
African economies.
While many of the report’s policy recommendations are based on Ethiopia, 
most of the policy issues addressed are common to many African countries. For 
this reason, the report does not always make a distinction between Ethiopia and 
Africa, although it does so where needed. 
Two comparators that in the late 1980s had levels of development similar to 
those in Africa were selected from East Asia: China and Vietnam. Because China 
is the world’s most competitive country in light manufacturing and a ﬁ erce 
competitor in Africa’s domestic markets, it was chosen as the benchmark coun-
try for an in-depth study of the cost structure of production. China is relevant 
as a comparator because, when it emerged onto world markets, it had to com-
pete in manufactured goods initially dominated by Hong Kong SAR, China; the 
Republic of Korea; Singapore; and Taiwan, China. When China started entering 
those labor-intensive sectors in 1979, it shared many of the investment climate 
constraints prevailing now in Ethiopia, which Ethiopia’s low labor costs can 
offset if labor is the main input for production. 
The sheer size of the Chinese economy makes it difﬁ cult for African countries 
to emulate its success. Vietnam is closer to African countries in size and level of 
development. Indeed, Vietnam does not have many of those favorable condi-
tions that China has today. But Vietnamese products in many light manufactur-
ing sectors compete with Chinese products in the domestic market, and some 
even compete in international markets because of Vietnam’s low labor costs.
How producers in Vietnam cope with competition from China can provide 
insights for African countries by bringing into focus the competitiveness gap 
that African countries need to ﬁ ll and the lessons they can learn to move for-
ward. Vietnam turned out to be a good choice of comparator because many of 
its development characteristics lie between those of China and the three African 
countries (Fafchamps and Quinn 2011). 
The decision to compare the three African countries with China and Viet-
nam was not based on the expectation that they can catch up right away. The 
conditions under which China and Vietnam initially started on their devel-
opment path were different and have changed substantially since then. For 
example, both China and Vietnam started their reforms with a highly educated 
workforce and a stable political regime. And each country has its own resource 
endowments and comparative advantages. 
But light manufacturing products coming out of Africa would have to com-
pete with Asian products in today’s market, and it is important to know what it
=== PAGE 165 ===
THE STUDY’S OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
 
145
would take for them to earn and keep market share. Moreover, a comparison of 
Africa with these Asian countries is certainly much more realistic than the tra-
ditional (implicit or explicit) comparison with production in the West, which 
has a longer and more complex history of development. 
Methodology
The study draws on ﬁ ve analytical tools: 
• New research based on the Enterprise Surveys 
• Qualitative interviews with about 300 enterprises (both formal and infor-
mal of all sizes) by the study team in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia and in 
China and Vietnam, based on a questionnaire designed by Professor John 
Sutton of the London School of Economics1
• Quantitative interviews with about 1,400 enterprises (both formal and infor-
mal of all sizes) by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at Oxford 
University in the same countries, based on the questionnaire designed by 
Professor Marcel Fafchamps and Dr. Simon Quinn of Oxford University 
• Comparative value chain and feasibility analysis based on in-depth inter-
views of about 300 formal medium enterprises in the same ﬁ ve countries, 
conducted by the consulting ﬁ rm Global Development Solutions, Inc. 
• A Kaizen study on the impact of managerial training for owners of small and 
medium enterprises. This training, delivered to about 250 entrepreneurs in 
Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Vietnam, was led by Japanese researchers from the 
Foundation for Advanced Studies on International Development and the 
National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies.
While these ﬁ ve data sources use different methodologies, their results are 
consistently similar, presenting a robust picture of the strengths and weaknesses 
of light manufacturing in Africa relative to East Asia. 
Enterprise Survey Studies
Four studies were conducted based on World Bank Enterprise Surveys, which 
provide representative samples of each country’s private sector. The surveys 
collect information on standard accounting measures of ﬁ rm performance 
and many areas of each country’s investment climate. Summaries of the broad 
survey results are posted on the Enterprise Surveys website (www.enterprise 
surveys.org).
=== PAGE 166 ===
146 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Since 2006 the surveys have used almost identical questionnaires and identi-
cal sampling methodologies. They were conducted in two to ﬁ ve cities in each 
country and covered ﬁ rms with more than ﬁ ve employees in manufacturing, 
construction, retail and wholesale services, hotels and restaurants, transport, 
storage, communications, and computer and related activities. The survey 
methodology is described in more detail and the survey data are available for 
download on the Enterprise Surveys website. 
In the ﬁ rst study we used a large sample, containing more than 39,000 ﬁ rms 
across 98 developing countries, to identify the most binding constraints on 
ﬁ rm operations (Dinh, Mavridis, and Nguyen 2010). While each country faces 
a different set of constraints, the constraints also vary by ﬁ rm characteristics, 
especially ﬁ rm size. 
In the second study we used ﬁ rm-level data from 89 countries to exam-
ine the performance of African ﬁ rms and the reasons for their disadvantages 
(Harrison, Lin, and Xu 2011). Our ﬁ ndings fail to conﬁ rm the perception that 
African manufacturing ﬁ rms are not globally competitive and cannot be com-
petitive in manufactured products. Formal manufacturing ﬁ rms in Africa do 
not perform much worse than those in other countries at similar income levels, 
but they do exhibit structural problems: similar sales growth and higher labor 
growth, but slightly lower productivity and much lower export intensity and 
investment rates. 
Given that the crucial issue of whether labor costs for formal ﬁ rms are higher 
in Africa than in other countries at similar levels of development, we commis-
sioned a third study to explore this question in greater depth, using data from 
the Enterprise Surveys, focusing on manufacturing (Clarke 2011a). 
To make sure our study incorporates the latest ﬁ ndings in the literature 
concerning how the investment climate affects ﬁ rm performance in Africa, we 
undertook a fourth study to review the empirical evidence on this issue (Clarke 
2011b). A preponderance of evidence points to the importance of ﬁ rm size. 
Qualitative Survey
The study team interviewed ﬁ rms with more than 300 owner-managers of 
enterprises (both formal and informal) of all sizes in all ﬁ ve countries, using 
the questionnaire designed by John Sutton as a guide. The objective was to learn 
about each ﬁ rm’s business, its owner-manager, and factors affecting business. 
Like the quantitative survey, this component of the study sought to go beyond 
the traditional investment climate surveys to probe the origin and capabilities 
of the ﬁ rm’s owner-manager, and other issues pertinent to the ﬁ rm’s operations 
and growth.
=== PAGE 167 ===
THE STUDY’S OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
 
147
For the origins and development of capabilities to manage the ﬁ rm, ques-
tions were asked about when and how the ﬁ rm was set up, the original sources 
of capital, and where the idea for the business, as well as the know-how or 
technological knowledge, came from. Questions were also asked about how and 
why the ﬁ rm’s owner moved from one product to another and the role of fam-
ily, relatives, or friends in the decision to make a product. For ﬁ nance, we asked 
about the initial and later sources of ﬁ nancing to expand the business, reasons 
for not using bank ﬁ nancing, and the cost of ﬁ nancing. We also asked about 
stafﬁ ng, including how hiring decisions were made. On inputs, we asked about 
sources of raw materials or inputs to produce the ﬁ nal product and the tariff 
or duty imposed on imported inputs. On market demand, we asked about the 
customers, the competition, and the government policies that affect the ﬁ rm’s 
competitiveness. We also asked about domestic competition and imports and 
about other types of constraints such as utilities and infrastructure. 
Quantitative Survey
In many ways the quantitative survey mirrors the qualitative survey. It sought 
to quantify as far as possible the foregoing questions in the context of a ﬁ rm 
survey and highlighted the contribution of factors that are different from those 
identiﬁ ed by the traditional investment climate assessments or Enterprise Sur-
veys. This component of the study was carried out by the Centre for the Study 
of African Economies at Oxford University (Fafchamps and Quinn 2011).
The traditional Enterprise Surveys focus on the investment climate or 
external environment in which ﬁ rms do business and identify policy-related 
constraints that need to be alleviated to promote a more conducive business 
environment. Many of these constraints relate to regulatory and bureaucratic 
hurdles, corruption, credit and interest rates, and availability of public services 
such as water, electricity, and roads that affect all types of ﬁ rms. The presump-
tion is that the capability of ﬁ rms to grow is uniform and that they will respond 
positively to an improved investment climate. The policy implications of the 
traditional Enterprise Surveys are well known: the government can contribute 
to a more conducive business environment by alleviating these constraints. But 
the Enterprise Surveys cannot explain why producers in a country with the 
same investment climate produce some products and not others. 
The quantitative survey focused on intrinsic differences among entrepre-
neurs, which can explain why some innovate, produce certain products, and 
prosper more than others in the same investment climate. The quantitative 
questionnaire asked the qualitative questions discussed above in a more rigor-
ous framework suitable for advanced econometric techniques.
=== PAGE 168 ===
148 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Comparative Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis
This analysis—by the Global Development Solutions of Reston, Virginia—
complements the other elements of the study by providing a complete micro-
economic framework to assess, for each product, the relative performance and 
potential of countries in productivity and costs and to identify some of the 
main factors contributing to low productivity and high costs. The comparative 
value chain and feasibility analysis highlights industry-speciﬁ c factors (such as 
product market regulations and market failures) that tend to be overlooked by 
traditional cross-cutting approaches, such as the Enterprise Surveys (Global 
Development Solutions 2011). 
The comparative value chain and feasibility analysis had the following 
objectives: 
• Benchmark the competitiveness (productivity and costs) of a selected group 
of African countries against Asian competitors (China and Vietnam) in a 
representative sample of simple light manufacturing value chains 
• Review the detailed breakdown of costs and productivity for each product 
and identify the main reasons for the productivity and cost gaps (such as 
policy and infrastructure issues, market failures, and a lack of social and 
human capital) done pro forma for the products not being produced 
• Identify the most important and common constraints for each product and 
across the sample of products 
• Generate insights into the possible practical solutions for addressing a criti-
cal mass of the identiﬁ ed constraints. 
The detailed comparative value chain analysis benchmarked productivity 
and costs between ﬁ rms in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Zambia and the compara-
tor countries, China and Vietnam. The analysis was based on interviews with 
more than 300 companies in these ﬁ ve countries and was conducted for speciﬁ c 
products (representative of broader product categories or industries) to ensure 
the comparability of performance benchmarks, such as costs and productivity, 
between countries and to establish causality between external factors and ﬁ rm 
performance through microeconomic analysis and company interviews. The 
conclusions can be generalized to broader product categories.
Six important and representative products were chosen for the value chain 
analyses: polo shirts, leather shoes (sheepskin loafers), wood chairs, crown corks 
(metal bottle caps), wheat ﬂ our, and processed milk. In addition, feasibility 
studies were conducted for men’s boxer briefs, leather golf gloves, and padlocks.
=== PAGE 169 ===
THE STUDY’S OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
 
149
Kaizen Training
In most African countries the private sector has a dual structure, with a large 
number of small indigenous enterprises and a small number of fairly large 
enterprises, often owned by foreigners or ethnic minorities or formerly owned 
by the government. These larger enterprises are, however, small and stagnant by 
the standards in other developing countries. 
Drawing on the work at the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies 
in Tokyo, Japan, this component of the study offered Kaizen training for micro 
and small entrepreneurs and assessed its short- and longer-term impact on ﬁ rm 
performance. Kaizen is a self-help approach to efﬁ ciency improvements in orga-
nizations, also called lean manufacturing, which includes performance-based 
human resource management, continual analysis and reﬁ nement of quality 
control procedures, inventory management, and planning. Developed in the 
manufacturing sector in Japan, the Kaizen approach has evolved into what is 
now a standard set of modern management practices in Europe and the United 
States. 
Most entrepreneurs of micro and small enterprises in developing countries 
are unaware of this approach to modern management. A major hypothesis is 
that imparting the basics of the Kaizen approach to entrepreneurs in micro 
and small enterprises will help their businesses to grow into small and medium 
enterprises. The National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies designed and 
implemented Kaizen training programs in Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Vietnam, 
so that participants could serve as a randomized pool of interviewees whose 
responses could be used to assess the impact of Kaizen training modules. 
The impacts of Kaizen training were measured through an experiment with 
four major components: baseline surveys of enterprises, the planning and 
implementation of managerial training programs, the post-training surveys of 
enterprises, and impact evaluation of the managerial training programs based 
on the experimental data collected through the baseline and post-training sur-
veys.  ustry in Dar es Salaam, the engineering industry in Addis Ababa, the knit-
wear industry in Ha Tay Province, and the rolled steel product industry in Bac 
Ninh Province. The sample consisted of about 120 enterprises in the garment 
and textile industry in Dar es Salaam, about 100 enterprises in the engineering 
industry in Addis Ababa, about 120 enterprises in the knitwear industry in Ha 
Tay, and about 200 enterprises in the rolled steel products industry in Bac Ninh. 
Because the ﬁ nal results of the Kaizen impact evaluation will not be available 
until 2012, this study reports the interim results available in early 2011 (Sonobe, 
Sazuki, and Otsuka 2011).
=== PAGE 170 ===
150 
 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING IN AFRICA
Note
 1. This questionnaire, and all the others mentioned in this paragraph, can be found in 
Fafchamps and Quinn 2011. 
References
Clarke, George. 2011a. “Wages and Productivity in Manufacturing in Africa: Some 
 Stylized Facts.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available 
online in Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, 
Washington, DC.
———. 2011b. “Assessing How the Investment Climate Affects Firm Performance in 
Africa: Evidence from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys.” Background paper (Light 
Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at http://econ.world 
bank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Dinh, Hinh T., Dimitris Mavridis, and Hoa B. Nguyen. 2010. “The Binding Constraint 
on Firms’ Growth in Developing Countries.” Background paper (Light Manufactur-
ing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at http://econ.worldbank.org
/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Simon Quinn. 2011. “Results from a Quantitative Survey.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume III at 
http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Global Development Solutions. 2011. “The Value Chain and Feasibility Analysis; Domes-
tic Resource Cost Analysis.” Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). 
Available online as Volume II at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Harrison, Ann E., Justin Y. Lin, and L. C. Xu. 2011. “Explaining Africa’s (Dis) Advantage.” 
Background paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online in Volume 
III at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing.  World Bank, Washington, DC.
Sonobe, Tetsushi, Aya Suzuki and Keijiro Otsuka. 2011. “Kaizen for Managerial Skills 
Improvement in Small and Medium Enterprises: An Impact Evaluation Study.” Back-
ground paper (Light Manufacturing in Africa Study). Available online as Volume IV 
at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing. World Bank, Washington, DC.
=== PAGE 171 ===
Index
A
Addis Ababa, 70, 117
Africa, 73
collateral requirements, 81–82
industrial park recommendations, 
73–75
labor constraints compared to East 
Asia, 49n8
public-private partnerships, 109
sources of expertise to ﬁ rm owners in, 
94–96
trade logistics, 85–86, 88–89
See also speciﬁ c country; Sub-Saharan 
Africa
African Growth and Opportunity Act 
(AGOA), 4, 42, 48, 50n15
agribusiness
agroprocessing and collateral 
requirements, 81
constraints in, 8–9, 132
as driver of structural transformation, 
25–26, 48n3
Ethiopia, 7, 128–32
input industries for, 7, 59–60
policy recommendations for, 10t2, 130
reforms in, 128–132
agricultural sector, 5, 64
and economic structure in, 24f1.2
employment in, 22–23
productivity in, 7, 22
reforms in, 132
analytical tools, 2
See also speciﬁ c tool; study
apparel industry, 6–7, 102
competitiveness in, 6, 116–18
constraints in, 6, 8–9, 116–18, 132
DRC ratios, 135t8.4
input costs, 61
policy recommendations for, 10t2
polo shirts, 27t1.1, 30t1.2, 48–49n7, 
102t6.2, 117f 8.1
role of FDI in China, 133–134b8.2
trade logistics in, 6, 115–20
training of workers in, 40, 49n14
Asia, 1, 22, 36
plug-and-play industrial parks, 12–13
solutions from concerning
collateral, 82–83
entrepreneurial skills, 94–101
ﬁ nance, 82–83
input industries, 62–63
skills, 103
trade logistics, 90
sources of funding in, 78–80, 84nn2–3
asset markets, 81–82
Association of Southeast Asia Nations, 90
authority, for implementation of reforms, 
74
=== PAGE 172 ===
152 
 
INDEX
B
Bangladesh, 34, 43, 45
Benin, 36
borrowing, sources of, 80
Burkina Faso, 23
C
Cambodia, 43, 45
Cameroon, 24f 1.2
cattle, 121
as collateral, 123, 129, 130
and leather products, 5, 6
See also livestock industry
Central Asia, level of industrialization, 
32–33
Centre for the Study of African 
Economics, Oxford University, 
147
Chile, 103
China, 25, 68, 101, 102
clustering in, 84
collateral requirements, 81–82
as comparator in study, 144–45, 148
and competitiveness, 16–17, 39, 108
education levels of ﬁ rm owners, 94, 
95f6.1
employee compensation, 28, 29, 48n5
entrepreneurial skills, 15
erosion of competitiveness of, 44–45
exports, 4, 34, 35–36, 134b8.2
FDI in, 133–34b8.2
ﬁ nance in, 77–80, 84nn2–3
housing for workers, 70
industrial parks, 12–13, 38, 68–69, 
71–73
input industries, 13, 59
investments as share of GDP, 48n1
labor costs, 28, 42–44, 47
marketing opportunities, 71
pilot initiatives, 16
prices in, 59–60, 61, 62, 94
production costs in, 55, 116–17, 120, 
121
productivity in, 7–8, 30, 31, 43–44
public-private partnerships, 109
reform support, 137
savings as share of GDP, 82
sources of expertise to ﬁ rm owners in, 
94–96
start-ups in, 15, 77, 97
trade logistics, 14, 85–87, 88–89
wages in, 27–28, 47
wheat costs, 128
wooden chair production, 124–25
workforce beneﬁ ts, 73
clothing market. See apparel industry
clustering, 43, 68–69, 72, 74, 84
collateral, 132
cattle as, 123, 129, 130
land as, 81, 82–83, 129, 130
need for, 80, 84n3
requirements for, 81–82
solutions from Asia experience, 82–83
Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa (COMESA), 42, 
49–50n17
competition and competitiveness, 33, 35, 
41, 90, 108–109
in agribusiness, 128–29
in apparel industry, 6, 116–18
Chinese, 39, 44–45, 108
constraints to, 131–34
and entrepreneurial skills, 15
and ﬁ rst movers, 14–15
impact of costs on, 57–59
impact of trade logistics on, 85–86
and implementation issues, 16–17
India, 93
impact of industrial land on, 67–70, 
75n3
and input industries, 13
in leather products, 121–22
in metal products, 127–28
and paucity of medium and large 
ﬁ rms, 37
plug-and-play industrial parks, 12–13
potential for, 47–48
promotion of, 9, 127–28
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 3, 39–44, 
49–50nn14–17
=== PAGE 173 ===
INDEX 
 
153
and vocational training, 15–16
wood products industry, 124–25, 126
See also trade logistics
constraints, 54–56, 68
in agribusiness, 8–9, 128–29, 132
on apparel industry, 6, 8–9, 116–18, 132
categories of, 12–13
Ethiopia, 9t1, 10t2, 54–56, 132–134
ﬁ nance options, 77–78
identiﬁ cation of, 3, 4–5
on leather products, 8–9, 121–22, 
131–32
for marketing of goods, 70–71
metal industry, 8–9, 127, 132
and overview of study, 113–15
policy adjustments for, 44–46
on subsectors, 8–9, 10t2, 46–48
variations in, 37–38
on wood products, 124–125, 132
consumables, cost of per chair, 125t8.1
container value, 89
cooperatives, 68
cost-beneﬁ t analysis, 107
costs, 38, 109
in agricultural sector, 60, 109, 128–29
of document preparation and letters 
of credit, 89
of ﬁ nance, 78–80, 84nn2–3
ﬁ nance, reasons for high costs of, 
80–82
of foreign exchange, 89
impact of input costs on 
competitiveness, 57–59
input industries, 55, 59–62
non-wage labor costs, 28
of reforms, 137
of steel, 126–28
and trade logistics, 55
See also labor costs; production costs; 
transport costs
Côte d’Ivoire, 24f 1.2
Cotonou Agreement, 4, 42, 48
credit markets, 81
crown corks, 27t1.1, 30t1.2, 102t6.2, 
135t8.4
currencies, Chinese, 43–44
customs operations, 89, 90, 117, 119
D
dairy farms, 27t1.1, 30t1.2, 102t6.2, 129
Dar es Salaam, 70, 87
deﬁ nition, light manufacturing, 25, 48n3
development partners, role of, 110
Djibouti, 87, 88, 89, 90
and apparel industry, 6, 116, 117–18
partnership with, 119
document preparation, costs of, 89
Doing Business, 46, 89
domestic resource cost (DRC) ratios, 
134–35
donor support, 137
DRC. See domestic resource cost (DRC) 
ratios
Durban, 88
E
East Asia, 21, 30
labor costs compared to African 
countries, 49n8
level of industrialization, 32–33
manufactured exports, 33–36
economies of scale, 37, 58, 68–69
economy
domestic, 37
Ethiopia, 5, 114
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 21–25, 48n1
ectoparasites, 7, 60, 122, 123
education, 94–95, 101–2
employment, 2
agribusiness, 128
in agriculture, 22–23
apparel industry, 6
and ﬁ rm growth link to access to 
ﬁ nance, 77
potential for job creation, 3–4
in rose farms, 99–101
Enterprise Survey data, 2, 26, 31, 115b8.1, 
145–48
entrepreneurial skills, 15, 118, 122, 123
level of education, 94, 95f6.1
=== PAGE 174 ===
154 
 
INDEX
entrepreneurial skills (continued)
in metal products, 127
overview, 93–94
possible solutions from Asia, 94–101
in wood products, 124–25
See also Kaizen study on managerial 
training; training
Ethiopia, 26, 38, 48, 68, 101, 108
agribusiness, 7, 128–32
apparel industry, 6–7, 115–20, 116
collateral requirements in, 82f4.1
constraints in, 8–9, 9t1, 10t2, 54–56, 
132–34
cut ﬂ ower market, 3, 14, 39, 70, 
99–101
economic structure in, 24f1.2
education level of ﬁ rm owners, 95f6.1
ﬁ nance options, 77–80
f.o.b. prices, 94
implementation of reforms in, 134–36
input industry, 6–7, 13
labor efﬁ ciency in, 102
leather products, 41, 50, 120–23
light manufacturing potential, 130–34
and managerial training, 97–98
manufactured exports, 34
metal products, 7–8, 126–28
political economy issues, 136–37
production costs in, 116–17
productivity in, 29–30, 31, 48–49n7
steel prices, 62
supply chains for, 69–70
technical assistance in, 97
and trade logistics, 86–87, 88–89, 
115–20
transport costs in, 88
wages in light manufacturing, 26–27
wheat prices, 59–60
wood products, 7–8, 61, 124–26
workforce in, 41
See also Ramsay Shoe Factory, 
Ethiopia; study
Ethiopia Development Bank, 100b6.1
Europe, level of industrialization, 32–33
European Union (EU), 1–2, 3, 25
preferential access to, 4, 6, 42, 48, 116, 
121, 131
exports, 6, 21, 120, 126
China, 4, 34, 35–36, 133–34b8.2
high-tech and low-tech, 36
manufactured, 33–36, 49n10
need to expand, 3, 4
non-oil, 35–36
removal of restrictions on, 63
Sub-Saharan Africa, 23, 25
F
factory shells, 68, 69
factory workers, 28–29
fair trade-certiﬁ ed farms, 100b6.1
FDI. See foreign direct investment (FDI)
ﬁ nance
access to, 118, 122
for agribusiness, 129
for metal products, 7–8, 127
for small holders, 64
for wood products, 7–8, 125
availability and cost of, 78–80, 
84nn2–3
costs of, 78–80, 84nn2–3, 117
link to ﬁ rm performance, 77–78, 84n1
policy recommendations for, 82–83
possible solutions from Asia, 82–84
reasons for high costs of, 80–82
ﬁ rms
access to ﬁ nance, 77–78, 84n1, 118
education level of owners, 94, 95f6.1
gap of productivity in, 93–94
growth of, 37, 49n11, 98
performance of, 31, 49n9, 77–78, 84n1
size of link to competition, 38
sources of expertise to ﬁ rm owners, 
94–96
ﬁ rst movers, 14–15, 97–101
See also start-ups
ﬂ ower market, 3, 14, 39, 70, 99–101
f.o.b. See free-on-board (f.o.b.) prices
foreign direct investment (FDI), 132
ﬂ ows to in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1, 
21–22
policies to encourage, 3, 4
role in Chinese manufacturing and 
apparel industries, 133–34b8.2
foreign exchange, 89, 117, 119
=== PAGE 175 ===
INDEX 
 
155
free-on-board (f.o.b.) prices, 85, 90, 94, 
118–19, 122
fringe beneﬁ ts, China, 28–29
funding, sources of, 78–79
G
GDP. See gross domestic product (GDP)
German Development Bank (KfW), 137
Ghana, 24f1.2, 38
Global Development Solutions, Reston, 
Virginia, 145
global markets, China’s share of, 42–43
governance, 17, 110
governments
commitment to support policies, 110
provision of management and 
technical skills, 15
role in competition, 16–17
support for light industries, 9
support for start-ups, 97, 101
gross domestic product (GDP), 49n12
and COMESA, 49–50n17
and employment, 22f 1.1
investments as share of, 1, 48n1
manufacturing as share of, 32–33
savings as share of, 82–83
share of trade in, 23
Sub-Saharan Africa, 1, 21, 32
gross domestic savings, 82–83
growth
ﬁ rm growth, 37, 49n11
and structural transformation, 21–25, 
48n1
H
herding enterprises, 6–7
Hong Kong SAR, China, 13
housing, shortages of, 70, 75n4
hydro-power, 108
I
IGAD. See Intergovernmental Authority 
on Development (IGAD)
implementation of reforms, 16–17
authority for, 74
Ethiopia, 113–14, 134–36
overview, 107–8
import duties, 13
on apparel inputs, 119
on leather, 61
on metal products, 127
removal on inputs, 63
on steel, 62
on wheat, 60
imports, 32, 33
demand for, 39
leather products, 122
link to competitiveness, 35, 37
income, 22–23
India, 93, 103
industrialization, Sub-Saharan Africa, 
32–33
industrial development, 16–17
industrial land, 67–70, 73–75, 75n3, 118
industrial parks, 12–13
China, 38, 71–75
See also plug-and-play industrial 
parks
industrial structure, 37–39, 49nn11–13
industry, and economic structure, 
24f 1.2
informal sector, and productivity, 38–39, 
49n12
information, 98, 99
infrastructure
constraints of, 68
deﬁ cits in, 89
development of, 90
investments in, 69, 74
innovation, 78, 79t4.3, 98
input industries, 40, 58, 59, 118, 119
agribusiness, 7, 59–60
agriculture, 64, 128, 129
costs of, 55, 59–62, 86
Ethiopia, 6–7, 13
impact of input costs on 
competitiveness, 57–59
and land issues, 69–70
leather products, 6–7, 59, 60–61
link to competition, 13
and marketing of goods, 70–71
overview, 57
policy issues and recommendations 
for, 8, 63–65
=== PAGE 176 ===
156 
 
INDEX
input industries (continued)
possible solutions from Asia, 62–63
support for, 62–63, 119–20
wood products, 61–62
interest rates, 80
Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD), 42, 
49n16
interviews, 2, 115b8.1, 145
investments
in infrastructure, 69, 74
leather products, 123
policies to enhance, 3–4, 7
reforms in, 8–9
as share of GDP, 1, 48n1
Sub-Saharan Africa, 21–22, 48n1
J
Japan, 33
Japan International Cooperation Agency, 
137
jobs. See employment
K
Kaizen study on managerial training, 
2, 48–49n7, 97, 103–4n1, 
115b8.1, 145
description, 149–150
ﬁ ndings, 15, 55, 98–99
modules for, 15–16, 98–99
Kenya, 24f 1.2
KfW. See German Development Bank 
(KfW)
L
labor costs, 5, 25–26, 38
African countries compared to East 
Asia countries, 49n8
as disadvantage for China, 42–44, 47
factory workers, 28–29
link to competitiveness, 3, 4
and trade logistics performance, 86–87
labor efﬁ ciency, 102t6.2
labor law, China, 28–29
land, 8, 38
access to, 122, 125, 127
for agriculture, livestock, and 
forestry sectors, 64, 129, 130
for leather products, 60
for rose farms, 100b6.1
for wood and metal products, 7–8
affordability of, 67–68
as collateral, 81, 82–83, 129, 130
compensation for, 75n1
industrial, 67–70, 73–75, 118
as key element in value chain, 69–70
reforms in, 83, 108
Latin America and the Caribbean, level of 
industrialization, 32–33
leasing, 83
leather products, 33, 102, 135t8.4
constraints in, 8–9, 121–22, 131–132
Ethiopia, 15, 97, 120–23
and input industries, 6–7, 59, 60–61
loafers, 27t1.1, 30t1.2, 102t6.2, 
135t8.4
policy recommendations for, 10t2, 
122–23
Ramsay Shoe Factory, Ethiopia, 15, 
97, 123
workforce in, 41
letters of credit, 89, 117
liberalization, 33, 64
literacy rates, 101–2
livestock industry, 5, 64
cross-bred cows, 129
disease control in, 7, 60, 122, 123
lumber, prices of, 62t2.2
M
machinery, 78–79, 81, 83–84
macroeconomic policies, 17, 45, 108
Madagascar, 86
Malaysia, 16, 103
Mali, 24f 1.2
management training, 15, 40, 97–98
See also entrepreneurial skills; Kaizen 
study on managerial training; 
training
manufacturing
in China, 43–44
classiﬁ cation of sectors in, 26
=== PAGE 177 ===
INDEX 
 
157
and economic structure in, 24f 1.2
role of FDI in China, 133–34b8.2
as share of GDP, 32–33
urban manufacturers, 28–39
markets and marketing, 70–71
growth of inside and outside Africa, 
42, 49–50nn15–17
for wood products, 124
Mauritius, 12
metal products
constraints in, 8–9, 127, 132
Ethiopia, 126–28
input costs, 62
land and ﬁ nance for, 7–8
policy recommendations for, 10t2
Middle East, level of industrialization, 
32–33
migrant workers, China, 28–29, 72–73
“missing middle” phenomenon, 77–78
N
National Bank of Ethiopia, 117, 119
National Graduate Institute for Policy 
Studies, Tokyo, Japan, 149
natural resources
as advantage for Sub-Saharan Africa, 
47
Ethiopia, 5, 114
link to competitiveness, 3–4
Nepal, 34
Nigeria, 36
nonbank ﬁ nancial institutions, 83
nonwage labor costs, 28
North Africa, level of industrialization, 
32–33
O
output markets, 129
output per worker, 93–94
overdraft facilities, 80, 84n3
P
the Paciﬁ c, level of industrialization, 
32–33
Pakistan, 34
partnerships, 90, 103, 109, 119
Penang Skills Development Centre, 
Malaysia, 103
per capita income, 31, 48n2
performance
and dual industrial structure, 37–39, 
49nn11–13
and industrialization, 32–33
and manufactured exports, 33–36
pilot initiatives, 16, 107
plug-and-play industrial parks, 8, 12–13, 
68, 119, 136
and agribusiness, 130
China, 71–73
development of, 10t2, 113, 119, 120, 
136, 140t8.5
and leather products, 123
and wood products, 126
policy recommendations, 113–14
for agribusiness, 10t2, 130
for apparel industry, 10t2
to attract FDI, 134b8.2
criteria for, 107, 108–9
to enhance investment, 3–4, 7
for ﬁ nance, 82–83
for industrial land, 73–75
for industry-speciﬁ c industries, 8–12
for input industries, 8, 63–65
for leather products, 10t2, 122–23
in light manufacturing, 131–32, 136
for metal products, 102t2
and political economy of reforms, 110
and resolution of constraints, 44–46
for trade logistics, 90
for wood products, 126
political economy issues, 110, 136–37, 
138–40t8.5
polo shirts
and DRC ratios, 135t8.4
and labor efﬁ ciency, 102t6.2
production costs, 117f 8.1
and productivity, 30t1.2, 48–49n7
and wages, 27t1.1
See also apparel industry
ports, 13, 87
access to, 89
and industrial zones, 14
=== PAGE 178 ===
158 
 
INDEX
ports (continued)
for leather products, 123
partnerships with, 90
port and terminal handling fees, 88
and transport costs, 88
See also Djibouti
poverty reduction, 69, 75n3
PPP. See purchasing power parity (PPP)
Preferential Trade Area for Eastern 
and Southern Africa (PTA), 
49–50n17
private sector investments, 7
private sector manufacturers, 33
production costs, 55, 89, 118–19
apparel industry, 116–17
China, 55, 116–17, 120, 121
and document preparation, 89
impact of input costs on, 57–58
impact on trade logistics, 85–86
leather products, 121, 122
wooden chairs, 124–25
productivity, 2, 38
in agriculture, 7, 22
Asia, 22
China, 7–8, 30, 31, 43–44
gap of in African ﬁ rms, 93–94
level of, 3, 4
per worker in select countries, 31ff1.4
in speciﬁ c sectors, 29–30, 48–49n7
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 29–30, 31, 40
variations in, 93–94
wood products, 7–8, 124
proﬁ tability, 44
PTA. See Preferential Trade Area for 
Eastern and Southern Africa 
(PTA)
public goods, 64
public-private partnerships, 109
purchasing power parity (PPP), 23, 48n2
Q
qualitative interviews, 2, 115b8.1, 145, 
146–47
quantitative interviews, 2, 115b8.1, 145, 
147
R
railway lines, 90
Ramsay Shoe Factory, Ethiopia, 15, 97, 
123
reforms
in agribusiness, 128–30, 132
economywide and industry–speciﬁ c, 
9, 107
implementation of, 16–17, 74, 107–8, 
113–14, 134–36
in investment climate, 8–9
and political economy, 110, 136–37, 
138–40t8.5
See also policy recommendations
regional integration, 63
regulations, agribusiness, 130
risks, 81
roof sheets. See tin roof industry
S
savings, 78, 81, 82
services sector, and economic structure, 
24f 1.2
Shamji, Ryaz, 100b6.1
Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, 12, 13
shipping costs, 89, 118
shoe factories, 97
showrooms, 70–71
skills, 40, 95, 118, 122
as constraint on productivity, 93
to manage medium and large ﬁ rms, 37
possible solutions from Asia, 103
and vocational training, 15–16
and wages in light manufacturing, 
26–28
of workers, 101–2, 124–25, 127
See also entrepreneurial skills
smallholders, access to ﬁ nance for, 64
South Asia, 32–36, 48n1
special economic zones, 12, 13, 71, 
133–34b8.2
Sri Lanka, 34
start-ups, 14–15, 77–78, 96–97
See also ﬁ rst movers
steel, 8, 59, 68, 126–128
=== PAGE 179 ===
INDEX 
 
159
storage facilities, 70–71
structural transformation
light manufacturing as driver of, 
25–26, 48n3
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 21–25, 48n1
study
comparative value chains and 
feasibility analysis, 145, 147
description, 4–6
features of, 2–3
industry and country focus of, 
143–45
Kaizen training programs, 2, 48–49n7, 
98–99, 145, 149–50
methodology, 145
overview of, 4–6
qualitative survey, 2, 115b8.1, 145, 
146–47
quantitative survey, 2, 115b8.1, 145, 
147
study analysis, 113–15
See also Ethiopia
Sub-Saharan Africa, 14, 69, 102, 110
and comparative advantage in 
light manufacturing, 26–30, 
48–49nn4–9
competitiveness in light 
manufacturing, 3, 39–44, 
49–50nn14–17
constraints, 44–48, 70–71
drivers of structural reform in, 25–26, 
48n3
and dual industrial structure, 37–39, 
49nn11–13
exports, 23, 25, 36
FDI, 1, 21
ﬁ nance
access to, 77–78, 84n1
costs of, 80–82
recommendations for solutions in, 
82–84
sources of, 78–80, 84nn2–3
GDP, 1, 21, 32, 82
and land acquisition, 67–68
level of industrialization, 32–33
managerial training in, 97–99
and manufactured exports, 33–36, 
49n10
possible solutions from Asia 
concerning skills, 103
productivity in, 29–30, 31, 40
savings as share of GDP, 82
share of global light manufacturing 
in, 1–2
structural transformation in, 21–26, 
48n1, 48nn11–13
subsectors
constraints in, 8–9, 10t2
resolving constraints in, 46–48
See also speciﬁ c subsector
supply chains, 40, 60, 69–70
T
tanneries, 122
Tanzania, 23, 30t1.2, 34, 38, 41
collateral requirements in, 82f4.1
constraints in, 54–56
economic structure in, 24f 1.2
education level of ﬁ rm owners, 94, 
95f6.1
ﬁ nance options, 77–78
as focus of study, 45, 143–45
industrial land in, 69
labor efﬁ ciency of, 102t6.2
literacy rates, 101
productivity in, 31, 93–94
sources of ﬁ nance in, 79–80
and trade logistics, 87, 88–89
wages in, 26–27
wheat prices, 59–60
technical assistance and training, 15–16, 
40, 103
China, 95
leather products, 123
link to competitiveness, 15
in metal products, 126–28
sector-speciﬁ c, 96–97
to smallholders, 64
technical skills development programs, 
16
=== PAGE 180 ===
160 
 
INDEX
technology, and exports, 35–36
timing, impact of for industrial parks, 
74–75
tin roof industry, 15, 39, 49n13, 101
Togo, 24f 1.2
trade, as share of GDP, 23
trade logistics, 14, 55, 127
apparel, 6, 41, 115–20, 127
development of, 62–63
factors that impair, 88–89
impact on competitiveness, 85–86
improvement of, 63–65
leather products, 6–7, 123
metal products, 128
overview, 85
performance index, 86–87
possible solutions from Asia, 90
wood products, 126
See also competition and 
competitiveness
trading-across-borders indicators, 86–87
training
entrepreneurial skills, 15
of entrepreneurs, 97–99, 103–4n1, 
149–50
of garment workers, 40, 49n14
as part of China’s industrial parks, 72
See also Kaizen study on managerial 
training; vocational training
transport costs, 40, 70, 88, 117, 119
trucking industry, 88
U
Uganda, 23
United National Industrial Development 
Organization, 137
United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, 133b8.2
United States, preferential access to, 2, 4, 
6, 25, 42, 48, 116, 121, 131
U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 60, 123, 
137
utilities, 67
V
value added per worker, 31
value chains, 13, 37
in agribusiness, 129
and feasibility analysis, 145, 147
for high-tech products, 36
land as issues in, 69–70
veterinary services, 60, 122, 123
Vietnam, 34, 69, 102, 108, 120, 128
collateral requirements in, 82f4.1
as comparator in study, 144–45, 148
education levels of ﬁ rm owners, 94, 
95f 6.1
ﬁ nance options, 77–80
housing for workers, 70
and industrial development, 16–17
input industries, 13, 59
investments as share of GDP, 48n1
labor efﬁ ciency in, 102
literacy rates, 101
and managerial training, 97–98
manufacturing clusters in, 43
productivity in, 7–8, 30t1.2, 31 
savings as share of GDP, 82
sources of expertise to ﬁ rm owners in, 
94–96
trade logistics, 14, 85, 86–87, 88–89
wages in light manufacturing, 26–27, 
47
wheat, 59–60, 128
wooden chair production, 124–25
wood prices, 61
workforce, 41, 102
vocational training, 15–16, 103
W
wages, 60
China, 26–28, 43–44, 47
in light manufacturing, 26–28, 47
link to housing, 70
link to productivity, 38
retained earnings, 78
skilled workers, 47
warehouses, 70–71
=== PAGE 181 ===
INDEX 
 
161
wheat, 135t8.4
costs of, 128, 129
labor efﬁ ciency in processing of, 
102t6.2
prices of, 59–60
processing and productivity, 30t1.2
and wages for processing, 27t1.1
wooden chairs, 94, 135t8.4
and labor efﬁ ciency, 102t6.2
productions costs of, 124–25
and productivity, 30t1.2
and wages, 27t1.1, 60
wood products
constraints in, 8–9, 132
Ethiopia, 124–26
input industries for, 59, 61–62
land and ﬁ nance for, 7–8
policy recommendations for, 10t2
and wood plantations, 126
workforce, 114
agriculture and informal sector, 22–23
comparison of beneﬁ ts of China vs. 
Africa, 73
employee compensation, 28, 29, 45n5
factory workers, 28–29
housing for, 70
labor costs per worker, 38
labor efﬁ ciency, 102t6.2
in leather products, 41
migrant workers, 28–29, 72–73
skilled vs. unskilled labor, 15, 26–28, 
40, 101–2
and structural transformation, 25–26
value added per worker, 31
wages link to productivity, 38
wood products, 124
See also wages
World Bank’s Doing Business project, 46
Z
Zambia, 34, 38, 41, 62, 94
collateral requirements in, 82f4.1
constraints in, 54–56
economic structure in, 24f 1.2
education level of ﬁ rm owners, 
95f 6.1
ﬁ nance options, 77–80
as focus of study, 143–50
labor efﬁ ciency of, 102t6.2
literacy rates, 101
productivity in, 30t1.2, 31, 93–94
supply chains for, 69–70
tin roof industry, 15, 39, 39n13, 101
and trade logistics, 87, 88–89
transport costs in, 88
wages in light manufacturing, 26–27
wheat prices, 59–60
zoning issues, 74–75
=== PAGE 182 ===
ECO-AUDIT
Environmental Benefits Statement
The World Bank is committed to preserving 
endangered forests and natural resources. The 
Office of the Publisher has chosen to print 
Light Manufacturing in Africa on recycled 
paper with 50 percent postconsumer fiber in 
accordance with the recommended standards 
for paper usage set by the Green Press Initia-
tive, a nonprofit program supporting publishers 
in using fiber that is not sourced from endan-
gered forests. For more information, visit 
www.greenpressinitiative.org.
Saved:
• 3 trees
•  1 million Btu of 
total energy
•  367 lb. of net 
greenhouse gases
•  1,655 gal. of waste 
water
•  105 lb. of solid 
waste
=== PAGE 183 ===

=== PAGE 184 ===
“ Light Manufacturing in Africa yields excellent new insights for African policy 
makers on how to grow industry and create productive jobs. The book combines 
sound economic analysis with careful and detailed micro and enterprise survey data 
to derive practical and sensible policy recommendations for the African context. In 
particular, the value chain analysis across countries on different continents provides 
a deep and clear empirical understanding of the relative costs, the priority con-
straints, and thus the policy interventions. This book is a must-read for anyone 
interested in African development and industrialization.”
  —K.Y. AMOAKO, President, African Center for Economic Transformation, Accra, Ghana
“ Excellent. I do not recall reading a book that is more clearly argued on the issue of 
manufacturing competitiveness in developing countries. The study’s great strength is 
that it combines very careful micro and enterprise level analysis with a deep under-
standing of the welfare economics that must underpin government intervention. 
The discussion of ﬁ scal cost and of the political economy of government intervention 
breaks new ground and gets to the heart of the implementation issue.”
  —URI DADUSH, Senior Associate and Director of the International Economics Program, 
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
“ Light Manufacturing in Africa presents an innovative approach to industrialization 
and job creation in Africa by identifying the binding constraints in speciﬁ c subsectors 
and suggesting policies to remove them and to enhance private investment and 
create productive jobs. Using Ethiopia as an exemplar, the book relies on a range of 
qualitative and quantitative tools to carefully assess the country’s low wage advan-
tage and production costs, and recommends policy interventions that the govern-
ment might pursue to foster speciﬁ c light manufacturing industries. I strongly 
recommend this book for development economists and policy makers interested in 
industrial development.”
  —HOWARD PACK, Professor of Business and Public Policy, the Wharton School of 
the University of Pennsylvania
“ By focusing more narrowly and digging more deeply than standard econometric 
studies have been able to do, this work sets a new standard for cost and productivity 
analyses of African manufacturing.”
  —JOHN SUTTON, Sir John Hicks Professor of Economics, the London School of Economics
Further information can be found online at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing
 ISBN 978-0-8213-8961-4
 SKU 18961
