=== PAGE 1 ===
659
8
This chapter should be cited as:
Myhre, G., D. Shindell, F.-M. Bréon, W. Collins, J. Fuglestvedt, J. Huang, D. Koch, J.-F. Lamarque, D. Lee, B. Mendoza, 
T. Nakajima, A. Robock, G. Stephens, T. Takemura and H. Zhang, 2013: Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forc­
ing. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, 
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Gunnar Myhre (Norway), Drew Shindell (USA)
Lead Authors:
François-Marie Bréon (France), William Collins (UK), Jan Fuglestvedt (Norway), Jianping Huang 
(China), Dorothy Koch (USA), Jean-François Lamarque (USA), David Lee (UK), Blanca Mendoza 
(Mexico), Teruyuki Nakajima (Japan), Alan Robock (USA), Graeme Stephens (USA), Toshihiko 
Takemura (Japan), Hua Zhang (China)
Contributing Authors:
Borgar Aamaas (Norway), Olivier Boucher (France), Stig B. Dalsøren (Norway), John S. Daniel 
(USA), Piers Forster (UK), Claire Granier (France), Joanna Haigh (UK), Øivind Hodnebrog 
(Norway), Jed O. Kaplan (Switzerland/Belgium/USA), George Marston (UK), Claus J. Nielsen 
(Norway), Brian C. O’Neill (USA), Glen P. Peters (Norway), Julia Pongratz (Germany), Michael 
Prather (USA), Venkatachalam Ramaswamy (USA), Raphael Roth (Switzerland), Leon Rotstayn 
(Australia), Steven J. Smith (USA), David Stevenson (UK), Jean-Paul Vernier (USA), Oliver Wild 
(UK), Paul Young (UK) 
Review Editors:
Daniel Jacob (USA), A.R. Ravishankara (USA), Keith Shine (UK)
Anthropogenic and Natural
Radiative Forcing
=== PAGE 2 ===
8
660
Table of Contents
Executive Summary..................................................................... 661
8.1	
Radiative Forcing............................................................. 664
	
8.1.1	
The Radiative Forcing Concept.................................. 664
	
Box 8.1: Definition of Radiative Forcing and Effective
	
Radiative Forcing....................................................................... 665
	
Box 8.2: Grouping Forcing Compounds by Common
	
Properties	.................................................................................. 668
	
8.1.2	
Calculation of Radiative Forcing due to
	
	
	
Concentration or Emission Changes.......................... 668
8.2	
Atmospheric Chemistry.................................................. 669
	
8.2.1	
Introduction............................................................... 669
	
8.2.2	
Global Chemistry Modelling in Coupled Model
	
	
	
Intercomparison Project Phase 5............................... 670
	
8.2.3	
Chemical Processes and Trace Gas Budgets............... 670
8.3	
Present-Day Anthropogenic Radiative Forcing....... 675
	
8.3.1	
Updated Understanding of the Spectral Properties of
	
	
	
Greenhouse Gases and Radiative Transfer Codes...... 675
	
8.3.2	
Well-mixed Greenhouse Gases.................................. 676
	
8.3.3	
Ozone and Stratospheric Water Vapour..................... 679
	
8.3.4	
Aerosols and Cloud Effects........................................ 682
	
8.3.5	
Land Surface Changes............................................... 686
8.4	
Natural Radiative Forcing Changes: Solar
	
	
and Volcanic...................................................................... 688
	
8.4.1	
Solar Irradiance......................................................... 688
	
8.4.2	
Volcanic Radiative Forcing......................................... 691
	
Box 8.3: Volcanic Eruptions as Analogues............................... 693
8.5	
Synthesis of Global Mean Radiative Forcing,
	
	
Past and Future................................................................. 693
	
8.5.1	
Summary of Radiative Forcing by Species and
	
	
	
Uncertainties............................................................. 694
	
8.5.2	
Time Evolution of Historical Forcing.......................... 698
	
8.5.3	
Future Radiative Forcing............................................ 700
8.6	
Geographic Distribution of Radiative Forcing........ 702
	
8.6.1	
Spatial Distribution of Current Radiative Forcing....... 702
	
8.6.2	
Spatial Evolution of Radiative Forcing and Response
	
	
	
over the Industrial Era............................................... 705
	
8.6.3	
Spatial Evolution of Radiative Forcing and Response
	
	
	
for the Future............................................................ 708
8.7	
Emission Metrics.............................................................. 710
	
8.7.1	
Metric Concepts........................................................ 710
	
Box 8.4: Choices Required When Using Emission Metrics..... 711
	
8.7.2	
Application of Metrics............................................... 716
References 	 .................................................................................. 721
Appendix 8.A: Lifetimes, Radiative Efficiencies and
Metric Values................................................................................. 731
Frequently Asked Questions
	
FAQ 8.1	
How Important Is Water Vapour to
	
	
	
Climate Change?..................................................... 666
	
FAQ 8.2	
Do Improvements in Air Quality Have an
	
	
	
Effect on Climate Change?.................................... 684 
Supplementary Material
	
Supplementary Material is available in online versions of the report.
=== PAGE 3 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
661
Executive Summary
It is unequivocal that anthropogenic increases in the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases (WMGHGs) have substantially enhanced 
the greenhouse effect, and the resulting forcing continues to 
increase. Aerosols partially offset the forcing of the WMGHGs and 
dominate the uncertainty associated with the total anthropogenic 
driving of climate change.
As in previous IPCC assessments, AR5 uses the radiative forcing1 
(RF) concept, but it also introduces effective radiative forcing2 
(ERF). The RF concept has been used for many years and in previous 
IPCC assessments for evaluating and comparing the strength of the 
various mechanisms affecting the Earth’s radiation balance and thus 
causing climate change. Whereas in the RF concept all surface and 
tropospheric conditions are kept fixed, the ERF calculations presented 
here allow all physical variables to respond to perturbations except 
for those concerning the ocean and sea ice. The inclusion of these 
adjustments makes ERF a better indicator of the eventual temperature 
response. ERF and RF values are significantly different for anthropo­
genic aerosols owing to their influence on clouds and on snow cover. 
These changes to clouds are rapid adjustments and occur on a time 
scale much faster than responses of the ocean (even the upper layer) to 
forcing. RF and ERF are estimated over the Industrial Era from 1750 to 
2011 if other periods are not explicitly stated. {8.1, Box 8.1, Figure 8.1}
Industrial-Era Anthropogenic Forcing
The total anthropogenic ERF over the Industrial Era is 2.3 (1.1 to 
3.3) W m–2.3 It is certain that the total anthropogenic ERF is positive. 
Total anthropogenic ERF has increased more rapidly since 1970 than 
during prior decades. The total anthropogenic ERF estimate for 2011 is 
43% higher compared to the AR4 RF estimate for the year 2005 owing 
to reductions in estimated forcing due to aerosols but also to contin­
ued growth in greenhouse gas RF. {8.5.1, Figures 8.15, 8.16}
Due to increased concentrations, RF from WMGHGs has 
increased by 0.20 (0.18 to 0.22) W m–2 (8%) since the AR4 esti­
mate for the year 2005. The RF of WMGHG is 2.83 (2.54 to 3.12) 
W m–2. The majority of this change since AR4 is due to increases in the 
carbon dioxide (CO2) RF of nearly 10%. The Industrial Era RF for CO2 
alone is 1.82 (1.63 to 2.01) W m–2, and CO2 is the component with the 
largest global mean RF. Over the last decade RF of CO2 has an average 
growth rate of 0.27 (0.24 to 0.30) W m–2 per decade. Emissions of CO2 
have made the largest contribution to the increased anthropogenic 
forcing in every decade since the 1960s. The best estimate for ERF of 
WMGHG is the same as the RF but with a larger uncertainty (±20%). 
{8.3.2, 8.5.2, Figures 8.6, 8.18}
The net forcing by WMGHGs other than CO2 shows a small 
increase since the AR4 estimate for the year 2005. A small growth 
in the CH4 concentration has increased its RF by 2% to an AR5 value 
of 0.48 (0.43 to 0.53) W m–2. RF of nitrous oxide (N2O) has increased 
by 6% since AR4 and is now 0.17 (0.14 to 0.20) W m–2. N2O concen­
trations continue to rise while those of dichlorodifluoromethane (CFC-
12), the third largest WMGHG contributor to RF for several decades, is 
falling due to its phase-out under the Montreal Protocol and amend­
ments. Since 2011 N2O has become the third largest WMGHG contrib­
utor to RF. The RF from all halocarbons (0.36 W m–2) is very similar to 
the value in AR4, with a reduced RF from chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
but increases from many of their substitutes. Four of the halocarbons 
(trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11), CFC-12, trichlorotrifluoroethane 
(CFC-113) and chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC-22)) account for around 
85% of the total halocarbon RF. The first three of these compounds 
have declining RF over the last 5 years but their combined decrease 
is compensated for by the increased RF from HCFC-22. Since AR4, the 
RF from all HFCs has nearly doubled but still only amounts to 0.02 
W m–2. There is high confidence4 that the overall growth rate in RF 
from all WMGHG is smaller over the last decade than in the 1970s and 
1980s owing to a reduced rate of increase in the combined non-CO2 
RF. {8.3.2; Figure 8.6}
Ozone and stratospheric water vapour contribute substantially 
to RF. The total RF estimated from modelled ozone changes is 0.35 
(0.15 to 0.55) W m–2, with RF due to tropospheric ozone changes of 
0.40 (0.20 to 0.60) W m–2 and due to stratospheric ozone changes of 
–0.05 (–0.15 to +0.05) W m–2. Ozone is not emitted directly into the 
atmosphere but is formed by photochemical reactions. Tropospheric 
ozone RF is largely attributed to anthropogenic emissions of methane 
(CH4), nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO) and non-methane 
volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), while stratospheric ozone RF 
results primarily from ozone depletion by halocarbons. Estimates are 
also provided attributing RF to emitted compounds. Ozone-depleting 
substances (ODS) cause ozone RF of –0.15 (–0.30 to 0.0) W m–2, some 
of which is in the troposphere. Tropospheric ozone precursors cause 
ozone RF of 0.50 (0.30 to 0.70) W m–2, some of which is in the strato­
sphere; this value is larger than that in AR4. There is robust evidence 
that tropospheric ozone also has a detrimental impact on vegetation 
physiology, and therefore on its CO2 uptake, but there is a low confi­
dence on quantitative estimates of the RF owing to this indirect effect. 
RF for stratospheric water vapour produced by CH4 oxidation is 0.07 
(0.02 to 0.12) W m–2. The RF best estimates for ozone and stratospheric 
1	
Change in net downward radiative flux at the tropopause after allowing for stratospheric temperatures to readjust to radiative equilibrium, while holding surface and tropo­
spheric temperatures and state variables fixed at the unperturbed values.
2	
Change in net downward radiative flux at the top of the atmosphere (TOA) after allowing for atmospheric temperatures, water vapour, clouds and land albedo to adjust, but 
with global mean surface temperature or ocean and sea ice conditions unchanged (calculations presented in this chapter use the fixed ocean conditions method).
3	
Uncertainties are given associated with best estimates of forcing. The uncertainty values represent the 5–95% (90%) confidence range.
4	
In this Report, the following summary terms are used to describe the available evidence: limited, medium, or robust; and for the degree of agreement: low, medium, or high. 
A level of confidence is expressed using five qualifiers: very low, low, medium, high, and very high, and typeset in italics, e.g., medium confidence. For a given evidence and 
agreement statement, different confidence levels can be assigned, but increasing levels of evidence and degrees of agreement are correlated with increasing confidence (see 
Section 1.4 and Box TS.1 for more details).
=== PAGE 4 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
662
water vapour are either identical or consistent with the range in AR4. 
{8.2, 8.3.3, Figure 8.7}
The magnitude of the aerosol forcing is reduced relative to AR4. 
The RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions, sometimes referred to as 
direct aerosol effect, is given a best estimate of –0.35 (–0.85 to +0.15) 
W m–2, and black carbon (BC) on snow and ice is 0.04 (0.02 to 0.09) 
W m–2. The ERF due to aerosol–radiation interactions is –0.45 (–0.95 to 
+0.05) W m–2. A total aerosol–cloud interaction5 is quantified in terms 
of the ERF concept with an estimate of –0.45 (–1.2 to 0.0) W m–2. The 
total aerosol effect (excluding BC on snow and ice) is estimated as ERF 
of –0.9 (–1.9 to –0.1) W m–2. The large uncertainty in aerosol ERF is the 
dominant contributor to overall net Industrial Era forcing uncertain­
ty. Since AR4, more aerosol processes have been included in models, 
and differences between models and observations persist, resulting in 
similar uncertainty in the aerosol forcing as in AR4. Despite the large 
uncertainty range, there is a high confidence that aerosols have offset 
a substantial portion of WMGHG global mean forcing. {8.3.4, 8.5.1, 
Figures 8.15, 8.16}
There is robust evidence that anthropogenic land use change 
has increased the land surface albedo, which leads to an RF of 
–0.15 ± 0.10 W m–2. There is still a large spread of estimates owing to 
different assumptions for the albedo of natural and managed surfaces 
and the fraction of land use changes before 1750. Land use change 
causes additional modifications that are not radiative, but impact the 
surface temperature, in particular through the hydrologic cycle. These 
are more uncertain and they are difficult to quantify, but tend to offset 
the impact of albedo changes. As a consequence, there is low agree­
ment on the sign of the net change in global mean temperature as a 
result of land use change. {8.3.5}
Attributing forcing to emissions provides a more direct link 
from human activities to forcing. The RF attributed to methane 
emissions is very likely6 to be much larger (~1.0 W  m–2) than that 
attributed to methane concentration increases (~0.5 W m–2) as concen­
tration changes result from the partially offsetting impact of emissions 
of multiple species and subsequent chemical reactions. In addition, 
emissions of CO are virtually certain to have had a positive RF, while 
emissions of NOX are likely to have had a net negative RF at the global 
scale. Emissions of ozone-depleting halocarbons are very likely to have 
caused a net positive RF as their own positive RF has outweighed the 
negative RF from the stratospheric ozone depletion that they have 
induced. {8.3.3, 8.5.1, Figure 8.17, FAQ 8.2}
Forcing agents such as aerosols, ozone and land albedo changes 
are highly heterogeneous spatially and temporally. These pat­
terns generally track economic development; strong negative aerosol 
forcing appeared in eastern North America and Europe during the early 
5	
 The aerosol–cloud interaction represents the portion of rapid adjustments to aerosols initiated by aerosol-cloud interactions, and is defined here as the total aerosol ERF minus 
the ERF due to aerosol-radiation-interactions (the latter includes cloud responses to the aerosol–radiation interaction RF)
6	
In this Report, the following terms have been used to indicate the assessed likelihood of an outcome or a result: Virtually certain 99–100% probability, Very likely 90–100%, 
Likely 66–100%, About as likely as not 33–66%, Unlikely 0–33%, Very unlikely 0–10%, Exceptionally unlikely 0–1%. Additional terms (Extremely likely: 95–100%, More likely 
than not >50–100%, and Extremely unlikely 0–5%) may also be used when appropriate. Assessed likelihood is typeset in italics, e.g., very likely (see Section 1.4 and Box TS.1 
for more details).
7	
Chapter 1 describes the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) that are the primary scenarios discussed in this report.
20th century, extending to Asia, South America and central Africa by 
1980. Emission controls have since reduced aerosol pollution in North 
America and Europe, but not in much of Asia. Ozone forcing increased 
throughout the 20th century, with peak positive amplitudes around 
15°N to 30°N due to tropospheric pollution but negative values over 
Antarctica due to stratospheric loss late in the century. The pattern 
and spatial gradients of forcing affect global and regional temperature 
responses as well as other aspects of climate response such as the 
hydrologic cycle. {8.6.2, Figure 8.25}
Natural Forcing
Satellite observations of total solar irradiance (TSI) changes 
from 1978 to 2011 show that the most recent solar cycle min­
imum was lower than the prior two. This very likely led to a small 
negative RF of –0.04 (–0.08 to 0.00) W m–2 between 1986 and 2008. 
The best estimate of RF due to TSI changes representative for the 1750 
to 2011 period is 0.05 (to 0.10) W m–2. This is substantially smaller 
than the AR4 estimate due to the addition of the latest solar cycle 
and inconsistencies in how solar RF has been estimated in earlier IPCC 
assessments. There is very low confidence concerning future solar forc­
ing estimates, but there is high confidence that the TSI RF variations 
will be much smaller than the projected increased forcing due to GHG 
during the forthcoming decades. {8.4.1, Figures 8.10, 8.11}
The RF of volcanic aerosols is well understood and is greatest 
for a short period (~2 years) following volcanic eruptions. There 
have been no major volcanic eruptions since Mt Pinatubo in 1991, but 
several smaller eruptions have caused a RF for the years 2008–2011 of 
–0.11 (–0.15 to –0.08) W m–2 as compared to 1750 and –0.06 (–0.08 
to –0.04) W m–2 as compared to 1999–2002. Emissions of CO2 from 
volcanic eruptions since 1750 have been at least 100 times smaller 
than anthropogenic emissions. {8.4.2, 8.5.2, Figures 8.12, 8.13, 8.18}
There is very high confidence that industrial-era natural forcing 
is a small fraction of the anthropogenic forcing except for brief 
periods following large volcanic eruptions. In particular, robust 
evidence from satellite observations of the solar irradiance and volcan­
ic aerosols demonstrates a near-zero (–0.1 to +0.1 W m–2) change in 
the natural forcing compared to the anthropogenic ERF increase of 1.0 
(0.7 to 1.3) W m–2 from 1980 to 2011. The natural forcing over the last 
15 years has likely offset a substantial fraction (at least 30%) of the 
anthropogenic forcing. {8.5.2; Figures 8.18, 8.19, 8.20}
Future Anthropogenic Forcing and Emission Metrics
Differences in RF between the emission scenarios considered 
here7 are relatively small for year 2030 but become very large by 
2100 and are dominated by CO2. The scenarios show a ­substantial
=== PAGE 5 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
663
weakening of the negative total aerosol ERF. Nitrate aerosols are an 
exception to this reduction, with a substantial increase, which is a 
robust feature among the few available models for these scenarios. 
The scenarios emphasized in this assessment do not span the range of 
future emissions in the literature, however, particularly for near-term 
climate forcers. {8.2.2, 8.5.3, Figures 8.2, 8.21, 8.22}
Emission metrics such as Global Warming Potential (GWP) and 
Global Temperature change Potential (GTP) can be used to 
quantify and communicate the relative and absolute contribu­
tions to climate change of emissions of different substances, 
and of emissions from regions/countries or sources/sectors. The 
metric that has been used in policies is the GWP, which integrates the 
RF of a substance over a chosen time horizon, relative to that of CO2. 
The GTP is the ratio of change in global mean surface temperature at 
a chosen point in time from the substance of interest relative to that 
from CO2. There are significant uncertainties related to both GWP and 
GTP, and the relative uncertainties are larger for GTP. There are also 
limitations and inconsistencies related to their treatment of indirect 
effects and feedbacks. The values are very dependent on metric type 
and time horizon. The choice of metric and time horizon depends on 
the particular application and which aspects of climate change are 
considered relevant in a given context. Metrics do not define policies 
or goals but facilitate evaluation and implementation of multi-com­
ponent policies to meet particular goals. All choices of metric contain 
implicit value-related judgements such as type of effect considered 
and weighting of effects over time. This assessment provides updated 
values of both GWP and GTP for many compounds. {8.7.1, 8.7.2, Table 
8.7, Table 8.A.1, Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16}
Forcing and temperature response can also be attributed to sec­
tors. From this perspective and with the GTP metric, a single year’s 
worth of current global emissions from the energy and industrial sec­
tors have the largest contributions to global mean warming over the 
next approximately 50 to 100 years. Household fossil fuel and biofuel, 
biomass burning and on-road transportation are also relatively large 
contributors to warming over these time scales, while current emis­
sions from sectors that emit large amounts of CH4 (animal husbandry, 
waste/landfills and agriculture) are also important over shorter time 
horizons (up to 20 years). {8.7.2, Figure 8.34}
=== PAGE 6 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
664
8.1	
Radiative Forcing
There are a variety of ways to examine how various drivers contribute 
to climate change. In principle, observations of the climate response 
to a single factor could directly show the impact of that factor, or cli­
mate models could be used to study the impact of any single factor. 
In practice, however, it is usually difficult to find measurements that 
are influenced by only a single cause, and it is computationally pro­
hibitive to simulate the response to every individual factor of interest. 
Hence various metrics intermediate between cause and effect are used 
to provide estimates of the climate impact of individual factors, with 
applications both in science and policy. Radiative forcing (RF) is one 
of the most widely used metrics, with most other metrics based on RF. 
In this chapter, we discuss RF from natural and anthropogenic compo­
nents during the industrial period, presenting values for 2011 relative 
to 1750 unless otherwise stated, and projected values through 2100 
(see also Annex II). In this section, we present the various definitions 
of RF used in this chapter, and discuss the utility and limitations of 
RF. These definitions are used in the subsequent sections quantifying 
the RF due to specific anthropogenic (Section 8.3) and natural (Sec­
tion 8.4) causes and integrating RF due to all causes (Sections 8.5 and 
8.6). Atmospheric chemistry relevant for RF is discussed in Section 8.2 
and used throughout the chapter. Emission metrics using RF that are 
designed to facilitate rapid evaluation and comparison of the climate 
effects of emissions are discussed in Section 8.7.
8.1.1	
The Radiative Forcing Concept
RF is the net change in the energy balance of the Earth system due to 
some imposed perturbation. It is usually expressed in watts per square 
meter averaged over a particular period of time and quantifies the 
energy imbalance that occurs when the imposed change takes place. 
Though usually difficult to observe, calculated RF provides a simple 
quantitative basis for comparing some aspects of the potential climate 
response to different imposed agents, especially global mean temper­
ature, and hence is widely used in the scientific community. Forcing is 
often presented as the value due to changes between two particular 
times, such as pre-industrial to present-day, while its time evolution 
provides a more complete picture.
8.1.1.1	 Defining Radiative Forcing
Alternative definitions of RF have been developed, each with its own 
advantages and limitations. The instantaneous RF refers to an instan­
taneous change in net (down minus up) radiative flux (shortwave plus 
longwave; in W m–2) due to an imposed change. This forcing is usually 
defined in terms of flux changes at the top of the atmosphere (TOA) 
or at the climatological tropopause, with the latter being a better indi­
cator of the global mean surface temperature response in cases when 
they differ.
Climate change takes place when the system responds in order to 
counteract the flux changes, and all such responses are explicitly 
excluded from this definition of forcing. The assumed relation between 
a sustained RF and the equilibrium global mean surface temperature 
response (DT) is DT = lRF where l is the climate sensitivity parameter. 
The relationship between RF and DT is an expression of the energy 
­balance of the climate system and a simple reminder that the steady-
state global mean climate response to a given forcing is determined 
both by the forcing and the responses inherent in l.
Implicit in the concept of RF is the proposition that the change in net 
irradiance in response to the imposed forcing alone can be separat­
ed from all subsequent responses to the forcing. These are not in fact 
always clearly separable and thus some ambiguity exists in what may 
be considered a forcing versus what is part of the climate response.
In both the Third Assessment Report (TAR) and AR4, the term radiative 
forcing (RF, also called stratospherically adjusted RF, as distinct from 
instantaneous RF) was defined as the change in net irradiance at the 
tropopause after allowing for stratospheric temperatures to readjust to 
radiative equilibrium, while holding surface and tropospheric tempera­
tures and state variables such as water vapour and cloud cover fixed at 
the unperturbed values8. RF is generally more indicative of the surface 
and tropospheric temperature responses than instantaneous RF, espe­
cially for agents such as carbon dioxide (CO2) or ozone (O3) change 
that substantially alter stratospheric temperatures. To be consistent 
with TAR and AR4, RF is hereafter taken to mean the stratospherically 
adjusted RF.
8.1.1.2	 Defining Effective Radiative Forcing
For many forcing agents the RF gives a very useful and appropriate way 
to compare the relative importance of their potential climate effect. 
Instantaneous RF or RF is not an accurate indicator of the temper­
ature response for all forcing agents, however. Rapid adjustments in 
the troposphere can either enhance or reduce the flux perturbations, 
leading to substantial differences in the forcing driving long-term cli­
mate change. In much the same way that allowing for the relatively 
rapid adjustment of stratospheric temperatures provides a more useful 
characterization of the forcing due to stratospheric constituent chang­
es, inclusion of rapid tropospheric adjustments has the potential to 
provide more useful characterization for drivers in the troposphere (see 
also Section 7.1.3).
Many of the rapid adjustments affect clouds and are not readily includ­
ed into the RF concept. For example, for aerosols, especially absorbing 
ones, changes in the temperature distribution above the surface occur 
due to a variety of effects, including cloud response to changing atmos­
pheric stability (Hansen et al., 2005; see Section 7.3.4.2) and cloud 
absorption effects (Jacobson, 2012), which affect fluxes but are not 
strictly part of RF. Similar adjustments take place for many forcings, 
including CO2 (see Section 7.2.5.6).
Aerosols also alter cloud properties via microphysical interactions 
leading to indirect forcings (referred to as aerosol–cloud interactions; 
8	
Tropospheric variables were fixed except for the impact of aerosols on cloud albedo due to changes in droplet size with constant cloud liquid water which was considered an 
RF in AR4 but is part of ERF in AR5.
=== PAGE 7 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
665
see Section 7.4). Although these adjustments are complex and not fully 
quantified, they occur both on the microphysical scale of the cloud 
particles as well as on a more macroscopic scale involving whole cloud 
systems (e.g., Shine et al., 2003; Penner et al., 2006; Quaas et al., 2009). 
A portion of these adjustments occurs over a short period, on cloud life 
cycle time scales, and is not part of a feedback arising from the sur­
face temperature changes. Previously these type of adjustments were 
sometimes termed ‘fast feedbacks’ (e.g., Gregory et al., 2004; Hansen 
et al., 2005), whereas in AR5 they are denoted ‘rapid adjustments’ to 
emphasize their distinction from feedbacks involving surface temper­
ature changes. Atmospheric chemistry responses have typically been 
included under the RF framework, and hence could also be included in 
a forcing encompassing rapid adjustments, which is important when 
evaluating forcing attributable to emissions changes (Section 8.1.2) 
and in the calculation of emission metrics (Section 8.7).
Studies have demonstrated the utility of including rapid adjustment in 
comparison of forcing agents, especially in allowing quantification of 
forcing due to aerosol-induced changes in clouds (e.g., effects previ­
ously denoted as cloud lifetime or semi-direct effects; see Figure 7.3) 
that are not amenable to characterization by RF (e.g., Rotstayn and 
Penner, 2001; Shine et al., 2003; Hansen et al., 2005; Lohmann et al., 
2010; Ban-Weiss et al., 2012). Several measures of forcing have been 
introduced that include rapid adjustments. We term a forcing that 
accounts for rapid adjustments the effective radiative forcing (ERF). 
Conceptually, ERF represents the change in net TOA downward radi­
ative flux after allowing for atmospheric temperatures, water vapour 
and clouds to adjust, but with global mean surface temperature or a 
portion of surface conditions unchanged. The primary methods in use 
for such calculations are (1) fixing sea surface temperatures (SSTs) and 
sea ice cover at climatological values while allowing all other parts of 
the system to respond until reaching steady state (e.g., Hansen et al., 
2005) or (2) analyzing the transient global mean surface temperature 
response to an instantaneous perturbation and using the regression of 
the response extrapolated back to the start of the simulation to derive 
the initial ERF (Gregory et al., 2004; Gregory and Webb, 2008). The 
ERF calculated using the regression technique has an uncertainty of 
about 10% (for the 5 to 95% confidence interval) for a single 4 × CO2 
simulation (ERF ~7 W m–2) due to internal variability in the transient 
climate (Andrews et al., 2012a), while given a similar length simulation 
the uncertainty due to internal variability in ERF calculated using the 
fixed-SST technique is much smaller and hence the latter may be more 
suitable for very small forcings. Analysis of both techniques shows that 
the fixed-SST method yields a smaller spread across models, even in 
calculations neglecting the uncertainty in the regression fitting proce­
dure (Andrews et al., 2012a). As a portion of land area responses are 
included in the fixed-SST technique, however, that ERF is slightly less 
than it would be with surface temperature held fixed everywhere. It is 
possible to adjust for this in the global mean forcing, though we do not 
include such a correction here as we examine regional as well as global 
ERF, but the land response will also introduce artificial gradients in 
land–sea temperatures that could cause small local climate responses. 
In contrast, there is no global mean temperature response included in 
the regression method. Despite the low bias in fixed-SST ERF due to 
land responses, results from a multi-model analysis of the forcing due 
to CO2 are 7% greater using this method than using the regression 
technique (Andrews et al., 2012a) though this is within the uncertainty 
range of the calculations. Although each technique has advantages, 
forcing diagnosed using the fixed-SST method is available for many 
more forcing agents in the current generation of climate models than 
forcing diagnosed using the regression method. Hence for practical 
purposes, ERF is hereafter used for results from the fixed-SST technique 
unless otherwise stated (see also Box 8.1).
The conceptual relation between instantaneous RF, RF and ERF is illus­
trated in Figure 8.1. It implies the adjustments to the instantaneous RF 
involve effects of processes that occur more rapidly than the time scale 
of the response of the global mean surface temperature to the forcing. 
However, there is no a priori time scale defined for adjustments to be 
rapid with the fixed-SST method. The majority take place on time scales 
Box 8.1 |  Definition of Radiative Forcing and Effective Radiative Forcing
The two most commonly used measures of radiative forcing in this chapter are the radiative forcing (RF) and the effective radiative 
forcing (ERF). RF is defined, as it was in AR4, as the change in net downward radiative flux at the tropopause after allowing for strato­
spheric temperatures to readjust to radiative equilibrium, while holding surface and tropospheric temperatures and state variables such 
as water vapor and cloud cover fixed at the unperturbed values.
ERF is the change in net TOA downward radiative flux after allowing for atmospheric temperatures, water vapour and clouds to adjust, 
but with surface temperature or a portion of surface conditions unchanged. Although there are multiple methods to calculate ERF, we 
take ERF to mean the method in which sea surface temperatures and sea ice cover are fixed at climatological values unless otherwise 
specified. Land surface properties (temperature, snow and ice cover and vegetation) are allowed to adjust in this method. Hence ERF 
includes both the effects of the forcing agent itself and the rapid adjustments to that agent (as does RF, though stratospheric tem­
perature is the only adjustment for the latter). In the case of aerosols, the rapid adjustments of clouds encompass effects that have 
been referred to as indirect or semi-direct forcings (see Figure 7.3 and Section 7.5), with some of these same cloud responses also 
taking place for other forcing agents (see Section 7.2). Calculation of ERF requires longer simulations with more complex models than 
calculation of RF, but the inclusion of the additional rapid adjustments makes ERF a better indicator of the eventual global mean tem­
perature response, especially for aerosols. When forcing is attributed to emissions or used for calculation of emission metrics, additional 
responses including atmospheric chemistry and the carbon cycle are also included in both RF and ERF (see Section 8.1.2). The general 
term forcing is used to refer to both RF and ERF.
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
666
Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 8.1 |  How Important Is Water Vapour to Climate Change?
As the largest contributor to the natural greenhouse effect, water vapour plays an essential role in the Earth’s 
climate. However, the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere is controlled mostly by air temperature, rather 
than by emissions. For that reason, scientists consider it a feedback agent, rather than a forcing to climate change. 
Anthropogenic emissions of water vapour through irrigation or power plant cooling have a negligible impact on 
the global climate.
Water vapour is the primary greenhouse gas in the Earth’s atmosphere. The contribution of water vapour to the 
natural greenhouse effect relative to that of carbon dioxide (CO2) depends on the accounting method, but can 
be considered to be approximately two to three times greater. Additional water vapour is injected into the atmo­
sphere from anthropogenic activities, mostly through increased evaporation from irrigated crops, but also through 
power plant cooling, and marginally through the combustion of fossil fuel. One may therefore question why there 
is so much focus on CO2, and not on water vapour, as a forcing to climate change.
Water vapour behaves differently from CO2 in one fundamental way: it can condense and precipitate. When air 
with high humidity cools, some of the vapour condenses into water droplets or ice particles and precipitates. The 
typical residence time of water vapour in the atmosphere is ten days. The flux of water vapour into the atmosphere 
from anthropogenic sources is considerably less than from ‘natural’ evaporation. Therefore, it has a negligible 
impact on overall concentrations, and does not contribute significantly to the long-term greenhouse effect. This is 
the main reason why tropospheric water vapour (typically below 10 km altitude) is not considered to be an anthro­
pogenic gas contributing to radiative forcing.
Anthropogenic emissions do have a significant impact on water vapour in the stratosphere, which is the part of 
the atmosphere above about 10 km. Increased concentrations of methane (CH4) due to human activities lead to 
an additional source of water, through oxidation, which partly explains the observed changes in that atmospheric 
layer. That stratospheric water change has a radiative impact, is considered a forcing, and can be evaluated. Strato­
spheric concentrations of water have varied significantly in past decades. The full extent of these variations is not 
well understood and is probably less a forcing than 
a feedback process added to natural variability. The 
contribution of stratospheric water vapour to warm­
ing, both forcing and feedback, is much smaller than 
from CH4 or CO2.
The maximum amount of water vapour in the air 
is controlled by temperature. A typical column of 
air extending from the surface to the stratosphere 
in polar regions may contain only a few kilograms 
of water vapour per square metre, while a simi­
lar column of air in the tropics may contain up to 
70 kg. With every extra degree of air temperature, 
the atmosphere can retain around 7% more water 
vapour (see upper-left insert in the FAQ 8.1, Figure 
1). This increase in concentration amplifies the green­
house effect, and therefore leads to more warming. 
This process, referred to as the water vapour feed­
back, is well understood and quantified. It occurs in 
all models used to estimate climate change, where 
its strength is consistent with observations. Although 
an increase in atmospheric water vapour has been 
observed, this change is recognized as a climate feed­
back (from increased atmospheric temperature) and 
should not be interpreted as a radiative forcing from 
anthropogenic emissions. (continued on next page)
FAQ 8.1, Figure 1 |  Illustration of the water cycle and its interaction with the 
greenhouse effect. The upper-left insert indicates the relative increase of poten­
tial water vapour content in the air with an increase of temperature (roughly 
7% per degree). The white curls illustrate evaporation, which is compensated by 
precipitation to close the water budget. The red arrows illustrate the outgoing 
infrared radiation that is partly absorbed by water vapour and other gases, a pro­
cess that is one component of the greenhouse effect. The stratospheric processes 
are not included in this figure.
T0-4
T0-2
T0
T0+2
T0+4
Temperature change
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
Water vapour
=== PAGE 9 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
667
of seasons or less, but there is a spectrum of adjustment times. Chang­
es in land ice and snow cover, for instance, may take place over many 
years. The ERF thus represents that part of the instantaneous RF that is 
maintained over long time scales and more directly contributes to the 
steady-state climate response. The RF can be considered a more limited 
version of ERF. Because the atmospheric temperature has been allowed 
to adjust, ERF would be nearly identical if calculated at the tropopause 
instead of the TOA for tropospheric forcing agents, as would RF. Recent 
work has noted likely advantages of the ERF framework for under­
standing model responses to CO2 as well as to more complex forcing 
agents (see Section 7.2.5.6).
The climate sensitivity parameter λ derived with respect to RF can vary 
substantially across different forcing agents (Forster et al., 2007). The 
response to RF from a particular agent relative to the response to RF 
from CO2 has been termed the efficacy (Hansen et al., 2005). By includ­
ing many of the rapid adjustments that differ across forcing agents, 
the ERF concept includes much of their relative efficacy and therefore 
leads to more uniform climate sensitivity across agents. For example, 
the influence of clouds on the interaction of aerosols with sunlight and 
the effect of aerosol heating on cloud formation can lead to very large 
differences in the response per unit RF from black carbon (BC) located 
at different altitudes, but the response per unit ERF is nearly uniform 
with altitude (Hansen et al., 2005; Ming et al., 2010; Ban-Weiss et al., 
2012). Hence as we use ERF in this chapter when it differs significantly 
from RF, efficacy is not used hereinafter. For inhomogeneous forcings, 
we note that the climate sensitivity parameter may also depend on the 
horizontal forcing distribution, especially with latitude (Shindell and 
Faluvegi, 2009; Section 8.6.2).
A combination of RF and ERF will be used in this chapter with RF pro­
vided to keep consistency with TAR and AR4, and ERF used to allow 
quantification of more complex forcing agents and, in some cases, pro­
vide a more useful metric than RF.
8.1.1.3	 Limitations of Radiative Forcing
Both the RF and ERF concepts have strengths and weaknesses in 
addition to those discussed previously. Dedicated climate model sim­
ulations that are required to diagnose the ERF can be more compu­
tationally demanding than those for instantaneous RF or RF because 
many years are required to reduce the influence of climate variability. 
The presence of meteorological variability can also make it difficult to 
isolate the ERF of small forcings that are easily isolated in the pair of 
radiative transfer calculations performed for RF (Figure 8.1). For RF, on 
the other hand, a definition of the tropopause is required, which can 
be ambiguous.
In many cases, however, ERF and RF are nearly equal. Analysis of 11 
models from the current Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 
5 (CMIP5) generation finds that the rapid adjustments to CO2 cause 
fixed-SST-based ERF to be 2% less than RF, with an intermodel stand­
ard deviation of 7% (Vial et al., 2013). This is consistent with an earlier 
study of six GCMs that found a substantial inter-model variation in 
the rapid tropospheric adjustment to CO2 using regression analysis in 
slab ocean models, though the ensemble mean adjustment was less 
than 5% (Andrews and Forster, 2008). Part of the large uncertainty 
range arises from the greater noise inherent in regression analyses of 
single runs in comparison with fixed-SST experiments. Using fixed-SST 
simulations, Hansen et al. (2005) found that ERF is virtually identical 
to RF for increased CO2, tropospheric ozone and solar irradiance, and 
within 6% for methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), stratospheric aer­
osols and for the aerosol–radiation interaction of reflective aerosols. 
Shindell et al. (2013b) also found that RF and ERF are statistically equal 
for tropospheric ozone. Lohmann et al. (2010) report a small increase 
in the forcing from CO2 using ERF instead of RF based on the fixed-SST 
technique, while finding no substantial difference for CH4, RF due to 
aerosol–radiation interactions or aerosol effects on cloud albedo. In 
the fixed-SST simulations of Hansen et al. (2005), ERF was about 20% 
less than RF for the atmospheric effects of BC aerosols (not including 
microphysical aerosol–cloud interactions), and nearly 300% greater 
for the forcing due to BC snow albedo forcing (Hansen et al., 2007). 
ERF was slightly greater than RF for stratospheric ozone in Hansen 
et al. (2005), but the opposite is true for more recent analyses (Shin­
dell et al., 2013b), and hence it seems most appropriate at present to 
use RF for this small forcing. The various studies demonstrate that RF 
provides a good estimate of ERF in most cases, as the differences are 
very small, with the notable exceptions of BC-related forcings (Bond 
et al., 2013). ERF provides better characterization of those effects, as 
well as allowing quantification of a broader range of effects including 
all aerosol–cloud interactions. Hence while RF and ERF are generally 
quite similar for WMGHGs, ERF typically provides a more useful indica­
tion of climate response for near-term climate forcers (see Box 8.2). As 
the rapid adjustments included in ERF differ in strength across climate 
models, the uncertainty range for ERF estimates tends to be larger than 
the range for RF estimates.
FAQ 8.1 (continued)
Currently, water vapour has the largest greenhouse effect in the Earth’s atmosphere. However, other greenhouse 
gases, primarily CO2, are necessary to sustain the presence of water vapour in the atmosphere. Indeed, if these other 
gases were removed from the atmosphere, its temperature would drop sufficiently to induce a decrease of water 
vapour, leading to a runaway drop of the greenhouse effect that would plunge the Earth into a frozen state. So 
greenhouse gases other than water vapour provide the temperature structure that sustains current levels of atmo­
spheric water vapour. Therefore, although CO2 is the main anthropogenic control knob on climate, water vapour 
is a strong and fast feedback that amplifies any initial forcing by a typical factor between two and three. Water 
vapour is not a significant initial forcing, but is nevertheless a fundamental agent of climate change.
=== PAGE 10 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
668
Whereas the global mean ERF provides a useful indication of the even­
tual change in global mean surface temperature, it does not reflect 
regional climate changes. This is true for all forcing agents, but is espe­
cially the case for the inhomogeneously distributed forcings because 
they activate climate feedbacks based on their regional distribution. 
For example, forcings over Northern Hemisphere (NH) middle and high 
latitudes induce snow and ice albedo feedbacks more than forcings at 
lower latitudes or in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) (e.g., Shindell and 
Faluvegi, 2009).
In the case of agents that strongly absorb incoming solar radiation 
(such as BC, and to a lesser extent organic carbon (OC) and ozone) the 
TOA forcing provides little indication of the change in solar radiation 
reaching the surface which can force local changes in evaporation and 
alter regional and general circulation patterns (e.g., Ramanathan and 
Carmichael, 2008; Wang et al., 2009). Hence the forcing at the surface, 
or the atmospheric heating, defined as the difference between sur­
face and tropopause/TOA forcing, might also be useful metrics. Global 
mean precipitation changes can be related separately to ERF within 
the atmosphere and to a slower response to global mean temperature 
changes (Andrews et al., 2010; Ming et al., 2010; Ban-Weiss et al., 
2012). Relationships between surface forcing and localized aspects of 
climate response have not yet been clearly quantified, however.
In general, most widely used definitions of forcing and most forc­
ing-based metrics are intended to be proportional to the eventual 
temperature response, and most analyses to date have explored the 
global mean temperature response only. These metrics do not explic­
itly include impacts such as changes in precipitation, surface sunlight 
available for photosynthesis, extreme events, and so forth, or regional 
Box 8.2 |  Grouping Forcing Compounds by Common Properties
As many compounds cause RF when their atmospheric concentration is changed, it can be useful to refer to groups of compounds with 
similar properties. Here we discuss two primary groupings: well-mixed greenhouse gases (WMGHGs) and near-term climate forcers 
(NTCFs).
We define as ‘well-mixed’ those greenhouse gases that are sufficiently mixed throughout the troposphere that concentration measure­
ments from a few remote surface sites can characterize the climate-relevant atmospheric burden; although these gases may still have 
local variation near sources and sinks and even small hemispheric gradients. Global forcing per unit emission and emission metrics 
for these gases thus do not depend on the geographic location of the emission, and forcing calculations can assume even horizontal 
distributions. These gases, or a subset of them, have sometimes been referred to as ‘long-lived greenhouse gases’ as they are well 
mixed because their atmospheric lifetimes are much greater than the time scale of a few years for atmospheric mixing, but the physical 
property that causes the aforementioned common characteristics is more directly associated with their mixing within the atmosphere. 
WMGHGs include CO2, N2O, CH4, SF6, and many halogenated species. Conversely, ozone is not a WMGHG.
We define ‘near-term climate forcers’ (NTCFs) as those compounds whose impact on climate occurs primarily within the first decade 
after their emission. This set of compounds is composed primarily of those with short lifetimes in the atmosphere compared to WMGHGs, 
and has been sometimes referred to as short-lived climate forcers or short-lived climate pollutants. However, the common property 
that is of greatest interest to a climate assessment is the time scale over which their impact on climate is felt. This set of compounds 
includes methane, which is also a WMGHG, as well as ozone and aerosols, or their precursors, and some halogenated species that 
are not WMGHGs. These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to centennial time scales, and so their effect on 
climate is predominantly in the near term following their emission.
temperatures, which can differ greatly from the global mean. Hence 
although they are quite useful for understanding the factors driving 
global mean temperature change, they provide only an imperfect and 
limited perspective on the factors driving broader climate change. In 
addition, a metric based solely on radiative perturbations does not 
allow comparison of non-RFs, such as effects of land cover change 
on evapotranspiration or physiological impacts of CO2 and O3 except 
where these cause further impacts on radiation such as through cloud 
cover changes (e.g., Andrews et al., 2012b).
8.1.2	
Calculation of Radiative Forcing due to 
Concentration or Emission Changes
Analysis of forcing due to observed or modelled concentration changes 
between pre-industrial, defined here as 1750, and a chosen later year 
provides an indication of the importance of different forcing agents to 
climate change during that period. Such analyses have been a main­
stay of climate assessments. This perspective has the advantage that 
observational data are available to accurately quantify the concentra­
tion changes for several of the largest forcing components. Atmospher­
ic concentration changes, however, are the net result of variations in 
emissions of multiple compounds and any climate changes that have 
influenced processes such as wet removal, atmospheric chemistry or 
the carbon cycle. Characterizing forcing according to concentration 
changes thus mixes multiple root causes along with climate feedbacks. 
Policy decisions are better informed by analysis of forcing attributable 
to emissions, which the IPCC first presented in AR4. These analyses can 
be applied to historical emissions changes in a ‘backward-looking’ per­
spective, as done for example, for major WMGHGs (den Elzen et al., 
2005; Hohne et al., 2011) and NTCFs (Shindell et al., 2009), or to current
=== PAGE 11 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
669
IRF: Net 
Flux 
     change
Temperature
   ﬁxed
     everywhere
Radiative 
forcing tries 
to modify
original 
temperature
Stratospheric 
T adjust
RF: Net Flux 
    change at
 tropopause
Tropospheric
  temperature
     ﬁxed
Net Flux 
change at
TOA
Ground
   temperature 
    ﬁxed 
ERF: Net Flux 
change at 
TOA
Net Flux = 0
Temperature
   adjusts
     everywhere
T0
Ts
a 
b 
c
d
e
Online or ofﬂine pair of 
radiative transfer 
calculations within one 
simulation
Calculation Methodology
Difference between 
two ofﬂine radiative 
transfer calculations 
with prescribed surface 
and tropospheric 
conditions allowing 
stratospheric 
temperature to adjust
Difference between 
two full atmospheric 
model simulations 
with prescribed 
surface conditions 
everywhere or 
estimate based on 
regression of 
response in full 
coupled atmosphere-
ocean simulation
Difference between 
two full atmospheric 
model simulations 
with prescribed ocean 
conditions (SSTs and 
sea ice)
Difference between 
two full coupled 
atmosphere-ocean 
model simulations
Climatological
Tropopause
Ocean
   ﬁxed
Figure 8.1 |  Cartoon comparing (a) instantaneous RF, (b) RF, which allows stratospheric temperature to adjust, (c) flux change when the surface temperature is fixed over the whole 
Earth (a method of calculating ERF), (d) the ERF calculated allowing atmospheric and land temperature to adjust while ocean conditions are fixed and (e) the equilibrium response 
to the climate forcing agent. The methodology for calculation of each type of forcing is also outlined. DTo represents the land temperature response, while DTs is the full surface 
temperature response. (Updated from Hansen et al., 2005.)
or projected future emissions in a ‘forward-looking’ view (see Section 
8.7). Emissions estimates through time typically come from the scientific 
community, often making use of national reporting for recent decades.
With the greater use of emission-driven models, for example, in CMIP5, 
it is becoming more natural to estimate ERF resulting from emissions 
of a particular species rather than concentration-based forcing. Such 
calculations typically necessitate model simulations with chemical 
transport models or chemistry–climate models, however, and require 
careful consideration of which processes are included, especially when 
comparing results to concentration-based forcings. In particular, simu­
lation of concentration responses to emissions changes requires incor­
porating models of the carbon cycle and atmospheric chemistry (gas 
and aerosol phases). The requisite expansion of the modelling realm for 
emissions-based forcing or emission metrics should in principle be con­
sistent for all drivers. For example, as the response to aerosol or ozone 
precursor emissions includes atmospheric chemistry, the response to 
CO2 emissions should as well. In addition, if the CO2 concentration 
responses to CO2 emissions include the impact of CO2-induced climate 
changes on carbon uptake, then the effect of climate changes caused 
by any other emission on carbon uptake should also be included. Simi­
larly, if the effects of atmospheric CO2 concentration change on carbon 
uptake are included, the effects of other atmospheric composition or 
deposition changes on carbon uptake should be included as well (see 
also Section 6.4.1). Comparable issues are present for other forcing 
agents. In practice, the modelling realm used in studies of forcing 
attributable to emissions has not always been consistent. Furthermore, 
climate feedbacks have sometimes been included in the calculation 
of forcing due to ozone or aerosol changes, as when concentrations 
from a historical transient climate simulation are imposed for an ERF 
calculation. In this chapter, we endeavour to clarify which processes 
have been included in the various estimates of forcing attributed to 
emissions (Sections 8.3 and 8.7).
RF or ERF estimates based on either historical emissions or concen­
trations provide valuable insight into the relative and absolute con­
tribution of various drivers to historical climate change. Scenarios of 
changing future emissions and land use are also developed based on 
various assumptions about socioeconomic trends and societal choices. 
The forcing resulting from such scenarios is used to understand the 
drivers of potential future climate changes (Sections 8.5.3 and 8.6). 
As with historical forcings, the actual impact on climate depends on 
both the temporal and spatial structure of the forcings and the rate of 
response of various portions of the climate system.
8.2	
Atmospheric Chemistry
8.2.1	
Introduction
Most radiatively active compounds in the Earth’s atmosphere are 
chemically active, meaning that atmospheric chemistry plays a large 
role in determining their burden and residence time. In the atmosphere, 
a gaseous chemically active compound can be affected by (1) interac­
tion with other species (including aerosols and water) in its immediate 
vicinity and (2) interaction with solar radiation (photolysis). Physical 
processes (wet removal and dry deposition) act on some chemical 
compounds (gas or aerosols) to further define their residence time 
in the atmosphere. Atmospheric chemistry is characterized by many 
interactions and patterns of temporal or spatial variability, leading to 
significant nonlinearities (Kleinman et al., 2001) and a wide range of 
time scales of importance (Isaksen et al., 2009).
=== PAGE 12 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
670
This section assesses updates in understanding of processes, modelling 
and observations since AR4 (see Section 2.3) on key reactive species 
contributing to RF. Note that aerosols, including processes responsible 
for the formation of aerosols, are extensively described in Section 7.3.
8.2.2	
Global Chemistry Modelling in Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 
Because the distribution of NTCFs cannot be estimated from obser­
vations alone, coupled chemistry-climate simulations are required to 
define their evolution and associated RF. While several CMIP5 mode­
ling groups performed simulations with interactive chemistry (i.e., com­
puted simultaneously within the climate model), many models used 
as input pre-computed distributions of radiatively active gases and/
or aerosols. To assess the distributions of chemical species and their 
respective RF, many research groups participated in the Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Climate Model Intercomparison Project (ACCMIP).
The ACCMIP simulations (Lamarque et al., 2013) were defined to pro­
vide information on the long-term changes in atmospheric composi­
tion with a few, well-defined atmospheric simulations. Because of the 
nature of the simulations (pre-industrial, present-day and future cli­
mates), only a limited number of chemistry-transport models (models 
which require a full definition of the meteorological fields needed to 
simulate physical processes and transport) participated in the ACCMIP 
project, which instead drew primarily from the same General Circu­
lation Models (GCMs) as CMIP5 (see Lamarque et al., 2013 for a list 
of the participating models and their configurations), with extensive 
model evaluation against observations (Bowman et al., 2013; Lee et 
al., 2013; Shindell et al., 2013c; Voulgarakis et al., 2013; Young et al., 
2013).
In all CMIP5/ACCMIP chemistry simulations, anthropogenic and bio­
mass burning emissions are specified. More specifically, a single set of 
historical anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions (Lamarque et 
al., 2010) and one set of emissions for each of the RCPs (van Vuuren 
et al., 2011) was defined (Figure 8.2). This was designed to increase 
the comparability of simulations. However, these uniform emission 
specifications mask the existing uncertainty (e.g., Bond et al., 2007; Lu 
et al., 2011), so that there is in fact a considerable range in the esti­
mates and time evolution of recent anthropogenic emissions (Granier 
et al., 2011). Historical reconstructions of biomass burning (wildfires 
and deforestation) also exhibit quite large uncertainties (Kasischke and 
Penner, 2004; Ito and Penner, 2005; Schultz et al., 2008; van der Werf 
et al., 2010). In addition, the RCP biomass burning projections do not 
include the feedback between climate change and fires discussed in 
Bowman et al. (2009), Pechony and Shindell (2010) and Thonicke et al. 
(2010). Finally, the RCP anthropogenic precursor emissions of NTCFs 
tend to span a smaller range than available from existing scenarios 
(van Vuuren et al., 2011). The ACCMIP simulations therefore provide an 
estimate of the uncertainty due to range of representation of physical 
and chemical processes in models, but do not incorporate uncertainty 
in emissions.
8.2.3	
Chemical Processes and Trace Gas Budgets
8.2.3.1	 Tropospheric Ozone
The RF from tropospheric ozone is strongly height- and latitude-de­
pendent through coupling of ozone change with temperature, water 
vapour and clouds (Lacis et al., 1990; Berntsen et al., 1997; Worden 
et al., 2008, 2011; Bowman et al., 2013). Consequently, it is necessary 
to accurately estimate the change in the ozone spatio-temporal struc­
ture using global models and observations. It is also well established 
that surface ozone detrimentally affects plant productivity (Ashmore, 
2005; Fishman et al., 2010), albeit estimating this impact on climate, 
although possibly significant, is still limited to a few studies (Sitch et 
al., 2007; UNEP, 2011).
Tropospheric ozone is a by-product of the oxidation of carbon monox­
ide (CO), CH4, and non-CH4 hydrocarbons in the presence of nitrogen 
oxides (NOx). As emissions of these precursors have increased (Figure 
8.2), tropospheric ozone has increased since pre-industrial times (Volz 
and Kley, 1988; Marenco et al., 1994) and over the last decades (Parrish 
et al., 2009; Cooper et al., 2010; Logan et al., 2012), but with important 
regional variations (Section 2.2). Ozone production is usually limited 
by the supply of HOx (OH + HO2) and NOX (NO + NO2) (Levy, 1971; 
Logan et al., 1981). Ozone’s major chemical loss pathways in the trop­
osphere are through (1) photolysis (to O(1D), followed by reaction with 
water vapour) and (2) reaction with HO2 (Seinfeld and Pandis, 2006). 
The former pathway leads to couplings between stratospheric ozone 
(photolysis rate being a function of the overhead ozone column) and 
climate change (through water vapour). Observed surface ozone abun­
dances typically range from less than 10 ppb over the tropical Pacific 
Ocean to more than 100 ppb downwind of highly emitting regions. The 
lifetime of ozone in the troposphere varies strongly with season and 
location: it may be as little as a few days in the tropical boundary layer, 
or as much as 1 year in the upper troposphere. Two recent studies give 
similar global mean lifetime of ozone: 22.3 ± 2 days (Stevenson et al., 
2006) and 23.4 ± 2.2 days (Young et al., 2013).
For present (about 2000) conditions, the various components of the 
budget of global mean tropospheric ozone are estimated from the 
ACCMIP simulations and other model simulations since AR4 (Table 
8.1). In particular, most recent models define a globally and annually 
averaged tropospheric ozone burden of (337 ± 23 Tg, 1-σ). Differences 
in the definition of the tropopause lead to inter-model variations of 
approximately 10% (Wild, 2007). This multi-model mean estimate of 
global annual tropospheric ozone burden has not significantly changed 
since the Stevenson et al. (2006) estimates (344 ± 39 Tg, 1-σ), and 
is consistent with the most recent satellite-based Ozone Monitoring 
Instrument–Microwave Limb Sounder (OMI-MLS; Ziemke et al., 2011) 
and Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES; Osterman et al., 2008) 
climatologies.
Estimates of the ozone chemical sources and sinks (uncertainty esti­
mates are quoted here as 1-σ) are less robust, with a net chemical 
production (production minus loss) of 618 ± 275 Tg yr–1 (Table 8.1), 
larger than the Atmospheric Composition Change: a European Net­
work (ACCENT) results (442 ± 309 Tg yr–1; Stevenson et al., 2006). Esti­
mates of ozone deposition (1094 ± 264 Tg yr–1) are slightly increased
=== PAGE 13 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
671
Black Carbon
CH4
CO
NH3
SO2
Organic Carbon
NMVOC
NOx
(TgC year-1)
(TgCH4 year-1)
(TgCO year-1)
(TgNH3 year-1)
(TgNMVOC year-1)
(TgNO2 year-1)
(TgC year-1)
(TgSO2 year-1)
Historical
RCP2.6
RCP4.5
RCP6.0
RCP8.5
SRES B1
IS92a
GAINS-CLE
GAINS-MFR
SRES A2
policy (upper bound) 
reference (upper bound) 
policy (lower bound) 
reference (lower bound) 
Post-SRES scenarios
CH4: Rogelj et al. (2011)
Others: van Vuuren et al. (2008)
Asia Modeling Exercise (Calvin
 et al., 2012)
2.6 W m-2 (mean) 
reference (mean)
Figure 8.2 |  Time evolution of global anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions 1850–2100 used in CMIP5/ACCMIP following each RCP. Historical (1850–2000) values are 
from Lamarque et al. (2010). RCP values are from van Vuuren et al. (2011). Emissions estimates from Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) are discussed in Annex II; note that 
black carbon and organic carbon estimates were not part of the SRES and are shown here only for completeness. The Maximum Feasible Reduction (MFR) and Current Legislation 
(CLE) are discussed in Cofala et al. (2007); as biomass burning emissions are not included in that publication, a fixed amount, equivalent to the value in 2000 from the RCP esti­
mates, is added (see Annex II for more details; Dentener et al., 2006). The post-SRES scenarios are discussed in Van Vuuren et al. (2008) and Rogelj et al. (2011). For those, only the 
range (minimum to maximum) is shown. Global emissions from the Asian Modelling Exercise are discussed in Calvin et al. (2012). Regional estimates are shown in Supplementary 
Material Figure 8.SM.1 and Figure 8.SM.2 for the historical and RCPs.
since ACCENT (1003 ± 200 Tg yr–1) while estimates of the net influx of 
ozone from the stratosphere to the troposphere (477 ± 96 Tg yr–1) have 
slightly decreased since ACCENT (552 ± 168 Tg yr–1). Additional model 
estimates of this influx (Hegglin and Shepherd, 2009; Hsu and Prather, 
2009) fall within both ranges, as do estimates based on observations 
(Murphy and Fahey, 1994; Gettelman et al., 1997; Olsen et al., 2002), 
all estimates being sensitive to their choice of tropopause definition 
and interannual variability.
Model simulations for present-day conditions or the recent past are 
evaluated (Figure 8.3) against frequent ozonesonde measurements 
(Logan, 1999; Tilmes et al., 2012) and additional surface, aircraft and 
satellite measurements. The ACCMIP model simulations (Figure 8.3) 
indicate 10 to 20% negative bias at 250 hPa in the SH tropical region, 
and a slight underestimate in NH tropical region. Comparison with 
satellite-based estimates of tropospheric ozone column (Ziemke et al., 
2011) indicates an annual mean bias of –4.3 ± 29 Tg (with a spatial 
correlation of 0.87 ± 0.07, 1-σ) for the ACCMIP simulations (Young et 
al., 2013). Overall, our ability to simulate tropospheric ozone burden 
for present (about 2000) has not substantially changed since AR4. 
Evaluation (using a subset of two ACCMIP models) of simulated trends 
(1960s to present or shorter) in surface ozone against observations at 
remote surface sites (see Section 2.2) indicates an underestimation, 
especially in the NH (Lamarque et al., 2010). Although this limits the 
ability to represent recent ozone changes, it is unclear how this trans­
lates into an uncertainty on changes since pre-industrial times.
=== PAGE 14 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
672
Table 8.1 |  Summary of tropospheric ozone global budget model and observation estimates for present (about 2000) conditions. Focus is on modelling studies published since 
AR4. STE stands for stratosphere–troposphere exchange. All uncertainties quoted as 1 standard deviation (68% confidence interval).
Burden
Production
Loss
Deposition
STE
Reference
Tg
Tg yr–1
Tg yr–1
Tg yr–1
Tg yr–1
Modelling Studies
337 ± 23
4877 ± 853
4260 ± 645
1094 ± 264
477 ± 96
Young et al. (2013); ACCMIP
323
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Archibald et al. (2011)
330
4876
4520
916
560
Kawase et al. (2011)
312
4289
3881
829
421
Huijnen et al. (2010)
334
3826
3373
1286
662
Zeng et al. (2010)
324
4870
4570
801
502
Wild and Palmer (2008)
314
N/A
N/A
1035
452
Zeng et al. (2008)
319
4487
3999
N/A
500
Wu et al. (2007)
372
5042
4507
884
345
Horowitz (2006)
349
4384
3972
808
401
Liao et al. (2006)
344 ± 39
5110 ± 606
4668 ± 727
1003 ± 200
552 ± 168
Stevenson et al. (2006); ACCENT
314 ± 33
4465 ± 514
4114 ± 409
949 ± 222
529 ± 105
Wild (2007) (post-2000 studies)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
515
Hsu and Prather (2009)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
655
Hegglin and Shepherd (2009)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
383–451
Clark et al. (2007)
Observational Studies
333
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Fortuin and Kelder (1998)
327
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Logan (1999)
325
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Ziemke et al. (2011); 60S–60N
319–351
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Osterman et al. (2008); 60S–60N
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
449 (192–872)
Murphy and Fahey (1994)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
510 (450–590)
Gettelman et al. (1997)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
500 ± 140
Olsen et al. (2001)
In most studies ‘pre-industrial’ does not identify a specific year but is 
usually assumed to correspond to 1850s levels; no observational infor­
mation on ozone is available for that time period. Using the Lamarque 
et al. (2010) emissions, the ACCMIP models (Young et al., 2013) are 
unable to reproduce the low levels of ozone observed at Montsouris 
1876–1886 (Volz and Kley, 1988). The other early ozone measurements 
using the Schönbein paper are controversial (Marenco et al., 1994) 
and assessed to be of qualitative use only. The main uncertainty in 
estimating the pre-industrial to present-day change in ozone there­
fore remains the lack of constraint on emission trends because of the 
very incomplete knowledge of pre-industrial ozone concentrations, of 
which no new information is available. The uncertainty on pre-indus­
trial conditions is not confined to ozone but applies to aerosols as well 
(e.g., Schmidt et al., 2012), although ice and lake core records provide 
some constraint on pre-industrial aerosol concentrations.
The ACCMIP results provide an estimated tropospheric ozone increase 
(Figure 8.4) from 1850 to 2000 of 98 ± 17 Tg (model range), similar 
to AR4 estimates. Skeie et al. (2011a) found an additional 5% increase 
in the anthropogenic contribution to the ozone burden between 2000 
and 2010, which translates into an approximately 1.5% increase in 
tropospheric ozone burden. A best estimate of the change in ozone 
since 1850 is assessed at 100 ± 25 Tg (1-σ). Attribution simulations 
(Stevenson et al., 2013) indicate unequivocally that anthropogenic 
changes in ozone precursor emissions are responsible for the increase 
between 1850 and present or into the future.
8.2.3.2	 Stratospheric Ozone and Water Vapour
Stratospheric ozone has experienced significant depletion since the 
1960s due to bromine and chlorine-containing compounds (Solomon, 
1999), leading to an estimated global decrease of stratospheric ozone 
of 5% between the 1970s and the mid-1990s, the decrease being 
largest over Antarctica (Fioletov et al., 2002). Most of the ozone loss 
is associated with the long-lived bromine and chlorine-containing 
compounds (chlorofluorocarbons and substitutes) released by human 
activities, in addition to N2O. This is in addition to a background level 
of natural emissions of short-lived halogens from oceanic and volcanic 
sources.
With the advent of the Montreal Protocol and its amendments, emis­
sions of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and replacements have strongly 
declined (Montzka et al., 2011), and signs of ozone stabilization and 
even possibly recovery have already occurred (Mader et al., 2010; Salby 
et al., 2012). A further consequence is that N2O emissions (Section 
8.2.3.4) likely dominate all other emissions in terms of ozone-depleting
=== PAGE 15 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
673
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
100
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
100
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
100
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
20
40
60
80
100
J FMAMJ J ASOND J
20
40
60
80
J FMAMJ J ASOND J
20
40
60
80
100
J FMAMJ J ASOND J
20
40
60
80
100
J FMAMJ J ASOND J
20
40
60
80
100
ACCMIP mean
ACCMIP models
ACCENT mean
r = 0.90, 0.96
mnbe = −12.2%, 3.0%
r = 0.61, 0.45
mnbe = −1.1%, 19.3%
r = 0.95, 0.97
mnbe = −2.2%, 10.9%
r = 0.94, 0.91
mnbe = −10.0%, −1.5%
r = 0.71, 0.59
mnbe = 5.0%, 15.0%
r = 0.99, 0.84
mnbe = 12.8%, 9.9%
r = 0.97, 0.98
mnbe = −2.6%, −8.5%
r = 0.97, 0.89
mnbe = −8.6%, −3.1%
r = 0.89, 0.81
mnbe = 7.8%, 10.8%
r = 0.95, 0.84
mnbe = 13.2%, 3.0%
250 hPa
500 hPa
750 hPa
90°S - 30°S
30°S - EQ
EQ - 30°N
30°N - 90°N
Ozonesondes
Ozone volume mixing ratio (ppb)
Figure 8.3 |  Comparisons between observations and simulations for the monthly mean ozone for ACCMIP results (Young et al., 2013). ACCENT refers to the model results in 
Stevenson et al. (2006). For each box, the correlation of the seasonal cycle is indicated by the r value, while the mean normalized bias estimated is indicated by mnbe value.
Historical
RCP2.6
RCP4.5
RCP6.0
RCP8.5
1850 1930 1980 2000 2000
2030 2100 2030 2100 2030 2100 2030 2100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Burden (Tg)
Modeled Past
Modeled Projections
Observations
ACCENT
Osterman et al.
Ziemke et al.
Logan
Fortuin and Kelder
2000
mean
Figure 8.4 |  Time evolution of global tropospheric ozone burden (in Tg(O3)) from 1850 to 2100 from ACCMIP results, ACCENT results (2000 only), and observational estimates 
(see Table 8.1). The box, whiskers, line and dot show the interquartile range, full range, median and mean burdens and differences, respectively. The dashed line indicates the 2000 
ACCMIP mean. (Adapted from Young et al., 2013.)
=== PAGE 16 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
674
potential (Ravishankara et al., 2009). Chemistry-climate models with 
resolved stratospheric chemistry and dynamics recently predicted an 
estimated global mean total ozone column recovery to 1980 levels to 
occur in 2032 (multi-model mean value, with a range of 2024 to 2042) 
under the A1B scenario (Eyring et al., 2010a). Increases in the strato­
spheric burden and acceleration of the stratospheric circulation leads 
to an increase in the stratosphere–troposphere flux of ozone (Shindell 
et al., 2006c; Grewe, 2007; Hegglin and Shepherd, 2009; Zeng et al., 
2010). This is also seen in recent RCP8.5 simulations, with the impact 
of increasing tropospheric burden (Kawase et al., 2011; Lamarque et 
al., 2011). However, observationally based estimates of recent trends 
in age of air (Engel et al., 2009; Stiller et al., 2012) do not appear 
to be consistent with the acceleration of the stratospheric circulation 
found in model simulations, possibly owing to inherent difficulties with 
extracting trends from SF6 observations (Garcia et al., 2011).
Oxidation of CH4 in the stratosphere (see Section 8.2.3.3) is a signifi­
cant source of water vapour and hence the long-term increase in CH4 
leads to an anthropogenic forcing (see Section 8.3) in the stratosphere. 
Stratospheric water vapour abundance increased by an average of 1.0 
± 0.2 (1-σ) ppm during 1980–2010, with CH4 oxidation explaining 
approximately 25% of this increase (Hurst et al., 2011). Other factors 
contributing to the long-term change in water vapour include changes 
in tropical tropopause temperatures (see Section 2.2.2.1).
8.2.3.3	 Methane
The surface mixing ratio of CH4 has increased by 150% since pre-indus­
trial times (Sections 2.2.1.1.2 and 8.3.2.2), with some projections indi­
cating a further doubling by 2100 (Figure 8.5). Bottom-up estimates of 
present CH4 emissions range from 542 to 852 TgCH4 yr–1 (see Table 6.8), 
while a recent top-down estimate with uncertainty analysis is 554 ± 
56 TgCH4 yr–1 (Prather et al., 2012). All quoted uncertainties in Section 
8.2.3.3 are defined as 1-σ.
The main sink of CH4 is through its reaction with the hydroxyl radical 
(OH) in the troposphere (Ehhalt and Heidt, 1973). A primary source 
of tropospheric OH is initiated by the photodissociation of ozone, fol­
lowed by reaction with water vapour (creating sensitivity to humid­
ity, cloud cover and solar radiation) (Levy, 1971; Crutzen, 1973). The 
Historical
RCP2.6
RCP4.5
RCP6.0
RCP8.5
SRES B1
IS92a
SRES A2
CH4 (ppm)
CO2 (ppm)
N2O (ppm)
Figure 8.5 |  Time evolution of global-averaged mixing ratio of long-lived species1850–2100 following each RCP; blue (RCP2.6), light blue (RCP4.5), orange (RCP6.0) and red 
(RCP8.5). (Based on Meinshausen et al., 2011b.)
other main source of OH is through secondary reactions (Lelieveld et 
al., 2008), although some of those reactions are still poorly understood 
(Paulot et al., 2009; Peeters et al., 2009; Taraborrelli et al., 2012). A 
recent estimate of the CH4 tropospheric chemical lifetime with respect 
to OH constrained by methyl chloroform surface observations is 11.2 
± 1.3 years (Prather et al., 2012). In addition, bacterial uptake in soils 
provides an additional small, less constrained loss (Fung et al., 1991); 
estimated lifetime = 120 ± 24 years (Prather et al., 2012), with another 
small loss in the stratosphere (Ehhalt and Heidt, 1973); estimated life­
time = 150 ± 50 years (Prather et al., 2012). Halogen chemistry in the 
troposphere also contributes to some tropospheric CH4 loss (Allan et 
al., 2007), estimated lifetime = 200 ± 100 years (Prather et al., 2012).
The ACCMIP estimate for present CH4 lifetime with respect to trop­
ospheric OH varies quite widely (9.8 ± 1.6 years (Voulgarakis et al., 
2013)), slightly shorter than the 10.2 ± 1.7 years in (Fiore et al. (2009), 
but much shorter than the methyl chloroform-based estimate of 11.2 
± 1.3 years (Prather et al., 2012). A partial explanation for the range in 
CH4 lifetime changes can be found in the degree of representation of 
chemistry in chemistry–climate models. Indeed, Archibald et al. (2010) 
showed that the response of OH to increasing nitrogen oxides strongly 
depends on the treatment of hydrocarbon chemistry in a model. The 
impact on CH4 distribution in the ACCMIP simulations is, however, 
rather limited because most models prescribed CH4 as a time-varying 
lower-boundary mixing ratio (Lamarque et al., 2013).
The chemical coupling between OH and CH4 leads to a significant 
amplification of an emission impact; that is, increasing CH4 emissions 
decreases tropospheric OH which in turn increases the CH4 lifetime 
and therefore its burden. The OH-lifetime sensitivity for CH4, s_OH =
–δln(OH)/δln(CH4), was estimated in Chapter 4 of TAR to be 0.32, 
implying a 0.32% decrease in tropospheric mean OH (as weighted by 
CH4 loss) for a 1% increase in CH4. The Fiore et al. (2009) multi-mod­
el (12 models) study provides a slightly smaller value (0.28 ± 0.03). 
Holmes et al. (2013) gives a range 0.31 ± 0.04 by combining Fiore et al. 
(2009), Holmes et al. (2011) and three new model results (0.36, 0.31, 
0.27). Only two ACCMIP models reported values (0.19 and 0.26; Voul­
garakis et al., 2013). The projections of future CH4 in Chapter 11 use 
the Holmes et al. (2013) range and uncertainty, which at the 2-σ level 
covers all but one model result. The feedback factor f, the ratio of the
=== PAGE 17 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
675
lifetime of a CH4 perturbation to the lifetime of the total CH4 burden, is 
calculated as f = 1/(1-s). Other CH4 losses, which are relatively insensi­
tive to CH4 burden, must be included so that f = 1.34 ± 0.06, (slightly 
larger but within the range of the Stevenson et al. (2006) estimate of 
1.29 ± 0.04, based on six models), leading to an overall perturbation 
lifetime of 12.4 ± 1.4 years, which is used in calculations of metrics 
in Section 8.7. Additional details are provided in the Supplementary 
Material Section 8.SM.2.
8.2.3.4	 Nitrous Oxide
Nitrous oxide (N2O) in 2011 has a surface concentration 19% above 
its 1750 level (Sections 2.2.1.1.3 and 8.3.2.3). Increases in N2O lead to 
depletion of mid- to upper-stratospheric ozone and increase in mid-lat­
itude lower stratospheric ozone (as a result of increased photolysis 
rate from decreased ozone above). This impacts tropospheric chemistry 
through increase in stratosphere–troposphere exchange of ozone and 
odd nitrogen species and increase in tropospheric photolysis rates and 
OH formation (Prather and Hsu, 2010). Anthropogenic emissions repre­
sent around 30 to 45% of the present-day global total, and are mostly 
from agricultural and soil sources (Fowler et al., 2009) and fossil-fuel 
activities. Natural emissions come mostly from microbial activity in the 
soil. The main sink for N2O is through photolysis and oxidation reac­
tions in the stratosphere, leading to an estimated lifetime of 131 ± 
10 years (Prather et al., 2012), slightly larger than previous estimates 
(Prather and Hsu, 2010; Montzka et al., 2011). The addition of N2O 
to the atmosphere changes its own lifetime through feedbacks that 
couple N2O to stratospheric NOy and ozone depletion (Prather, 1998; 
Ravishankara et al., 2009; Prather and Hsu, 2010), so that the lifetime 
of a perturbation is less than that of the total burden, 121 ± 10 years 
(1-σ; Prather et al., 2012) and is used in calculations of metrics (Sec­
tion 8.7).
8.2.3.5	 Halogenated Species
Halogenated species can be powerful greenhouse gases (GHGs). Those 
containing chlorine and bromine also deplete stratospheric ozone 
and are referred to as ozone-depleting substances (ODSs). Most of 
those compounds do not have natural emissions and, because of the 
implementation of the Montreal Protocol and its amendments, total 
emissions of ODSs have sharply decreased since the 1990s (Montzka 
et al., 2011). For CFCs, perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and SF6 the main loss 
is through photolysis in the stratosphere. The CFC substitutes (hydro­
chlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)) are 
destroyed by OH oxidation in the troposphere. Their global concen­
tration has steadily risen over the recent past (see Section 2.2.1.1.4).
8.2.3.6	 Aerosols
Aerosol particles are present in the atmosphere with size ranges 
from a few nanometres to tens of micrometres. They are the results 
of direct emission (primary aerosols: BC, OC, sea salt, dust) into the 
atmosphere or as products of chemical reactions (secondary inorganic 
aerosols: sulphate, nitrate, ammonium; and secondary organic aero­
sols (SOAs)) occurring in the atmosphere. Secondary inorganic aero­
sols are the products of reactions involving sulphur dioxide, ammonia 
and nitric oxide emissions. SOAs are the result of chemical reactions 
of non-methane hydrocarbons (and their products) with the hydroxyl 
radical (OH), ozone, nitrate (NO3) or photolysis (Hallquist et al., 2009). 
Thus although many hydrocarbons in the atmosphere are of biogenic 
origin, anthropogenic pollutants can have impacts on their conversion 
to SOAs. There is tremendous complexity and still much uncertainty in 
the processes involved in the formation of SOAs (Hallquist et al., 2009; 
Carslaw et al., 2010). Additional information can be found in Section 
7.3.2.
Once generated, the size and composition of aerosol particles can be 
modified by additional chemical reactions, condensation or evapora­
tion of gaseous species and coagulation (Seinfeld and Pandis, 2006). 
It is this set of processes that defines their physical, chemical and opti­
cal properties, and hence their impact on radiation and clouds, with 
large regional and global differences (see Section 7.3.3). Furthermore, 
their distribution is affected by transport and deposition, defining a 
residence time in the troposphere of usually a few days (Textor et al., 
2006).
8.3	
Present-Day Anthropogenic Radiative
Forcing
Human activity has caused a variety of changes in different forcing 
agents in the atmosphere or land surface. A large number of GHGs 
have had a substantial increase over the Industrial Era and some of 
these gases are entirely of anthropogenic origin. Atmospheric aerosols 
have diverse and complex influences on the climate. Human activity 
has modified the land cover and changed the surface albedo. Some of 
the gases and aerosols are directly emitted to the atmosphere where­
as others are secondary products from chemical reactions of emitted 
species. The lifetimes of these different forcing agents vary substan­
tially. This section discusses all known anthropogenic forcing agents 
of non-negligible importance and their quantification in terms of RF 
or ERF based on changes in abundance over the 1750–2011 period.
In this section we determine the RFs for WMGHGs and heterogene­
ously distributed species in fundamentally different ways. As described 
in Box 8.2, the concentrations of WMGHGs can be determined from 
observations at a few surface sites. For the pre-industrial concentra­
tions these are typically from trapped air in polar ice or firn (see Sec­
tion 2.2.1). Thus the RFs from WMGHGs are determined entirely from 
observations (Section 8.3.2). In contrast, we do not have sufficient 
pre-industrial or present-day observations of heterogeneously distrib­
uted forcing agents (e.g., ozone and aerosols) to be able to character­
ize their RF; therefore we instead have to rely on chemistry–climate 
models (Sections 8.3.3 and 8.3.4).
8.3.1	
Updated Understanding of the Spectral Properties 
of Greenhouse Gases and Radiative Transfer Codes
RF estimates are performed with a combination of radiative transfer 
codes typical for GCMs as well as more detailed radiative transfer 
codes. Physical properties are needed in the radiative transfer codes 
such as spectral properties for gases. The HITRAN (HIgh Resolution 
TRANsmission molecular absorption) database (Rothman, 2010) is 
widely used in radiative transfer models. Some researchers studied
=== PAGE 18 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
676
the difference among different editions of HITRAN databases for 
diverse uses (Feng et al., 2007; Kratz, 2008; Feng and Zhao, 2009; 
Fomin and Falaleeva, 2009; Lu et al., 2012). Model calculations have 
shown that modifications of the spectroscopic characteristics tend to 
have a modest effect on the determination of RF estimates of order 
2 to 3% of the calculated RF attributed to the combined doubling of 
CO2, N2O and CH4. These results showed that even the largest overall 
RF induced by differences among the HITRAN databases is consider­
ably smaller than the range reported for the modelled RF estimates; 
thus the line parameter updates to the HITRAN database are not a 
significant source for discrepancies in the RF calculations appearing 
in the IPCC reports. However, the more recent HITRAN data set is 
still recommended, as the HITRAN process offers internal verification 
and tends to progress closer to the best laboratory measurements. 
It is found that the differences among the water vapour continuum 
absorption formulations tend to be comparable to the differences 
among the various HITRAN databases (Paynter and Ramaswamy, 
2011); but use of the older Robert continuum formula produces signif­
icantly larger flux differences, thus, replacement of the older continu­
um is warranted (Kratz, 2008) and there are still numerous unresolved 
issues left in the continuum expression, especially related to short­
wave radiative transfer (Shine et al., 2012). Differences in absorption 
data from various HITRAN versions are very likely a small contributor 
to the uncertainty in RF of GHGs.
Line-by-line (LBL) models using the HITRAN data set as an input are 
the benchmark of radiative transfer models for GHGs. Some research­
ers compared different LBL models (Zhang et al., 2005; Collins et al., 
2006) and line-wing cutoff, line-shape function and gas continuum 
absorption treatment effects on LBL calculations (Zhang et al., 2008; 
Fomin and Falaleeva, 2009). The agreement between LBL codes has 
been investigated in many studies and found to generally be within 
a few percent (e.g., Collins et al., 2006; Iacono et al., 2008; Forster et 
al., 2011a) and to compare well to observed radiative fluxes under 
controlled situations (Oreopoulos et al., 2012). Forster et al. (2011a) 
evaluated global mean radiatively important properties of chemistry 
climate models (CCMs) and found that the combined WMGHG global 
annual mean instantaneous RF at the tropopause is within 30% of LBL 
models for all CCM radiation codes tested. The accuracies of the LW RF 
due to CO2 and tropospheric ozone increase are generally very good 
and within 10% for most of the participation models, but problems 
remained in simulating RF for stratospheric water vapour and ozone 
changes with errors between 3% and 200% compared to LBL models. 
Whereas the differences in the results from CCM radiation codes were 
large, the agreement among the LW LBL codes was within 5%, except 
for stratospheric water vapour changes.
Most intercomparison studies of the RF of GHGs are for clear-sky and 
aerosol-free conditions; the introduction of clouds would greatly com­
plicate the targets of research and are usually omitted in the intercom­
parison exercises of GCM radiation codes and LBL codes (e.g., Collins 
et al., 2006; Iacono et al., 2008). It is shown that clouds can reduce 
the magnitude of RF due to GHGs by about 25% (Forster et al., 2005; 
Worden et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011), but the influence of clouds 
on the diversity in RF is found to be within 5% in four detailed radi­
ative transfer schemes with realistic cloud distributions (Forster et al., 
2005). Estimates of GHG RF are based on the LBL codes or the ­radiative 
­transfer codes compared and validated against LBL models, and the 
uncertainty range from AR4 in the RF of GHG of 10% is retained. We 
underscore that uncertainty in RF calculations in many GCMs is sub­
stantially higher owing both to radiative transfer codes and meteoro­
logical data such as clouds adopted in the simulations.
8.3.2	
Well-mixed Greenhouse Gases
AR4 assessed the RF from 1750 to 2005 of the WMGHGs to be 2.63 
W m–2. The four most important gases were CO2, CH4, dichlorodifluo­
romethane (CFC-12) and N2O in that order. Halocarbons, comprising 
CFCs, HCFCs, HFCs, PFCs and SF6, contributed 0.337 W m–2 to the total. 
Uncertainties (90% confidence ranges) were assessed to be approxi­
mately 10% for the WMGHGs. The major changes to the science since 
AR4 are the updating of the atmospheric concentrations, the inclusion 
of new species (NF3 and SO2F2) and discussion of ERF for CO2. Since 
AR4 N2O has overtaken CFC-12 as the third largest contributor to RF. 
The total WMGHG RF is now 2.83 (2.54 to 3.12) W m–2.
The RFs in this section are derived from the observed differences in 
concentrations of the WMGHGs between 1750 and 2011. The con­
centrations of CO2, CH4 and N2O vary throughout the pre-industrial 
era, mostly due to varying climate, with a possible small contribution 
from anthropogenic emissions (MacFarling Meure et al., 2006). These 
variations do not contribute to uncertainty in the RF as strictly defined 
here, but do affect the RF attribution to anthropogenic emissions. On 
centennial time scales, variations in late Holocene concentrations of 
CO2 are around 10 ppm (see note to Table 2.1), much larger than 
the uncertainty in the 1750 concentration. This would equate to a 
variation in the RF of 10%. For CH4 and N2O the centennial variations 
are comparable to the uncertainties in the 1750 concentrations and 
so do not significantly affect the estimate of the 1750 value used in 
calculating RF.
8.3.2.1	 Carbon Dioxide
The tropospheric mixing ratio of CO2 has increased globally from 278 
(276–280) ppm in 1750 to 390.5 (390.3 to 390.7) ppm in 2011 (see 
Section 2.2.1.1.1). Here we assess the RF due to changes in atmos­
pheric concentration rather than attributing it to anthropogenic emis­
sions. Section 6.3.2.6 describes how only a fraction of the historical 
CO2 emissions have remained in the atmosphere. The impact of land 
use change on CO2 from 1850 to 2000 was assessed in AR4 to be 12 to 
35 ppm (0.17 to 0.51 W m–2).
Using the formula from Table 3 of Myhre et al. (1998), and see Supple­
mentary Material Table 8.SM.1, the CO2 RF (as defined in Section 8.1) 
from 1750 to 2011 is 1.82 (1.63 to 2.01) W m–2. The uncertainty is dom­
inated by the radiative transfer modelling which is assessed to be 10% 
(Section 8.3.1). The uncertainty in the knowledge of 1750 concentra­
tions contributes only 2% (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.2)
Table 8.2 shows the concentrations and RF in AR4 (2005) and 2011 for 
the most important WMGHGs. Figure 8.6 shows the time evolution of 
RF and its rate of change. Since AR4, the RF of CO2 has increased by 
0.16 W m–2 and continues the rate noted in AR4 of almost 0.3 W m–2 
per decade. As shown in Figure 8.6(d) the rate of increase in the RF
=== PAGE 19 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
677
from the WMGHGs over the last 15 years has been dominated by CO2. 
Since AR4, CO2 has accounted for more than 80% of the WMGHG RF 
increase. The interannual variability in the rate of increase in the CO2 
RF is due largely to variation in the natural land uptake whereas the 
trend is driven by increasing anthropogenic emissions (see Figure 6.8 
in Section 6.3.1).
As described in Section 8.1.1.3, CO2 can also affect climate through 
physical effects on lapse rates and clouds, leading to an ERF that will 
be different from the RF. Analysis of CMIP5 models (Vial et al., 2013) 
found a large negative contribution to the ERF (20%) from the increase 
in land surface temperatures which was compensated for by positive 
contributions from the combined effects on water vapour, lapse rate, 
albedo and clouds. It is therefore not possible to conclude with the 
current information whether the ERF for CO2 is higher or lower than 
the RF. Therefore we assess the ratio ERF/RF to be 1.0 and assess our 
uncertainty in the CO2 ERF to be (–20% to 20%). We have medium 
confidence in this based on our understanding that the physical pro­
cesses responsible for the differences between ERF and RF are small 
enough to be covered within the 20% uncertainty.
There are additional effects mediated through plant physiology, reduc­
ing the conductance of the plant stomata and hence the transpiration 
of water. Andrews et al. (2012b) find a physiological enhancement of 
the adjusted forcing by 3.5% due mainly to reductions in low cloud. 
This is smaller than a study with an earlier model by Doutriaux-Bouch­
er et al. (2009) which found a 10% effect. Longer-term impacts of 
CO2 on vegetation distributions also affect climate (O’ishi et al., 2009; 
Andrews et al., 2012b) but because of the longer time scale we choose 
to class these as feedbacks rather than rapid adjustments.
8.3.2.2	 Methane
Globally averaged surface CH4 concentrations have risen from 722 ± 
25 ppb in 1750 to 1803 ± 2 ppb by 2011 (see Section 2.2.1.1.2). Over 
that time scale the rise has been due predominantly to changes in 
anthropogenic-related CH4. Anthropogenic emissions of other com­
pounds have also affected CH4 concentrations by changing its remov­
al rate (Section 8.2.3.3). Using the formula from Myhre et al. (1998) 
(see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.1) the RF for CH4 from 1750 
to 2011 is 0.48 ± 0.05 W m–2, with an uncertainty dominated by the 
radiative transfer calculation. This increase of 0.01 W m–2 since AR4 is 
due to the 29 ppb increase in the CH4 mixing ratio. This is much larger 
than the 11 ppb increase between TAR and AR4, and has been driven 
by increases in net natural and anthropogenic emissions, but the rel­
ative contributions are not well quantified. Recent trends in CH4 and 
their causes are discussed in Sections 2.2.1.1.2 and 6.3.3.1. CH4 con­
centrations do vary with latitude and decrease above the tropopause; 
however, this variation contributes only 2% to the uncertainty in RF 
(Freckleton et al., 1998).
In this section only the direct forcing from changing CH4 concentrations 
is addressed. CH4 emissions can also have indirect effects on climate 
through impacts on CO2, stratospheric water vapour, ozone, sulphate 
aerosol and lifetimes of HFCs and HCFCs (Boucher et al., 2009; Shindell 
et al., 2009; Collins et al., 2010). Some of these are discussed further in 
Sections 8.3.3, 8.5.1 and 8.7.2.
8.3.2.3	 Nitrous Oxide
Concentrations of nitrous oxide have risen from 270 ± 7 ppb in 1750 to 
324.2 ± 0.1 ppb in 2011, an increase of 5 ppb since 2005 (see Section 
2.2.1.1.3). N2O now has the third largest forcing of the anthropogenic 
gases, at 0.17 ± 0.03 W m–2 an increase of 6% since 2005 (see Table 
Figure 8.6 |  (a) Radiative forcing (RF) from the major well-mixed greenhouse gases 
(WMGHGs) and groups of halocarbons from 1850 to 2011 (data from Tables A.II.1.1 
and A.II.4.16), (b) as (a) but with a logarithmic scale, (c) RF from the minor WMGHGs 
from 1850 to 2011 (logarithmic scale). (d) Rate of change in forcing from the major 
WMGHGs and groups of halocarbons from 1850 to 2011.
=== PAGE 20 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
678
8.2) where the uncertainty is due approximately equally to the pre-in­
dustrial concentration and radiative transfer. Only the direct RF from 
changing nitrous oxide concentrations is included. Indirect effects of 
N2O emissions on stratospheric ozone are not taken into account here 
but are discussed briefly in Section 8.7.2.
8.3.2.4	 Other Well-mixed Greenhouse Gases
RFs of the other WMGHG are shown in Figure 8.6 (b and c) and Table 
8.2. The contribution of groups of halocarbons to the rate of change 
of WMGHG RF is shown in Figure 8.6 (d). Between 1970 and 1990 
halocarbons made a significant contribution to the rate of change of 
RF. The rate of change in the total WMGHG RF was higher in 1970 to 
1990 with high confidence compared to the present owing to higher 
contribution from non-CO2 gases especially the halocarbons. Since the 
Montreal Protocol and its amendments, the rate of change of RF from 
halocarbons and related compounds has been much less, but still just 
positive (total RF of 0.360 W m–2 in 2011 compared to 0.351 W m–2 in 
2005) as the growth of HCFCs, HFCs, PFCs and other halogens (SF6, 
SO2F2, NF3) RFs (total 0.022 W m–2 since 2005) more than compensates 
Notes:
a	 Pre-industrial values are zero except for CO2 (278 ppm), CH4 (722 ppb), N2O (270 ppb) and CF4 (35 ppt).
b	 Total includes 0.007 W m–2 to account for CFC-114, Halon-1211 and Halon-1301.
c	
Total includes 0.009 W m–2 forcing (as in AR4) to account for CFC-13, CFC-114, CFC-115, Halon-1211 and Halon-1301.
d	 Defined here as CFCs + HCFCs + CH3CCl3 + CCl4.
e	 The value for the 1750 methane concentrations has been updated from AR4 in this report, thus the 2005 methane RF is slightly lower than reported in AR4.
f	
Estimates for halocarbons given in the table may have changed from estimates reported in AR4 owing to updates in radiative efficiencies and concentrations.
Table 8.2 |  Present-day mole fractions (in ppt(pmol mol–1) except where specified) and RF (in W m–2) for the WMGHGs. Concentration data are averages of National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Advanced Global Atmospheric Gases Experiment (AGAGE) observations where available. CO2 concentrations are the average of NOAA 
and SIO. See Table 2.1 for more details of the data sources. The data for 2005 (the time of the AR4 estimates) are also shown. Some of the concentrations vary slightly from those 
reported in AR4 owing to averaging different data sources. Radiative efficiencies for the minor gases are given in Table 8.A.1. Uncertainties in the RF for all gases are dominated 
by the uncertainties in the radiative efficiencies. We assume the uncertainties in the radiative efficiencies to be perfectly correlated between the gases, and the uncertainties in the 
present day and 1750 concentrations to be uncorrelated.
Concentrations (ppt)
Radiative forcinga (W m–2)
Species
2011
2005
2011
2005
CO2 (ppm)
391 ± 0.2
379
1.82 ± 0.19
1.66
CH4 (ppb)
1803 ± 2
1774
0.48 ± 0.05
0.47e
N2O (ppb)
324 ± 0.1
319
0.17 ± 0.03
0.16
CFC-11
238 ± 0.8
251
0.062
0.065
CFC-12
528 ± 1
542
0.17
0.17
CFC-13
2.7
0.0007
CFC-113
74.3 ± 0.1
78.6
0.022
0.024
CFC-115
8.37
8.36
0.0017
0.0017
HCFC-22
213 ± 0.1
169
0.0447
0.0355
HCFC-141b
21.4 ± 0.1
17.7
0.0034
0.0028
HCFC-142b
21.2 ± 0.2
15.5
0.0040
0.0029
HFC-23
24.0 ± 0.3
18.8
0.0043
0.0034
HFC-32
4.92
1.15
0.0005
0.0001
HFC-125
9.58 ± 0.04
3.69
0.0022
0.0008
HFC-134a
62.7 ± 0.3
34.3
0.0100
0.0055
HFC-143a
12.0 ± 0.1
5.6
0.0019
0.0009
HFC-152a
6.4 ± 0.1
3.4
0.0006
0.0003
SF6
7.28 ± 0.03
5.64
0.0041
0.0032
SO2F2
1.71
1.35
0.0003
0.0003
NF3
0.9
0.4
0.0002
0.0001
CF4
79.0 ± 0.1
75.0
0.0040
0.0036
C2F6
4.16 ± 0.02
3.66
0.0010
0.0009
CH3CCl3
6.32 ± 0.07
18.32
0.0004
0.0013
CCl4
85.8 ± 0.8
93.1
0.0146
0.0158
CFCs
0.263 ± 0.026b
0.273c
HCFCs
0.052 ± 0.005
0.041
Montreal gasesd
0.330 ± 0.033
0.331
Total halogens
0.360 ± 0.036
0.351f
Total
2.83 ± 0.029
2.64
=== PAGE 21 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
679
for the decline in the CFCs, CH3CCl3 and CCl4 RFs (–0.013 W m–2 since 
2005). The total halocarbon RF is dominated by four gases, namely 
CFC-12, trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11), chlorodifluoromethane 
(HCFC-22) and trichlorofluoroeethane (CFC-113) in that order, which 
account for about 85% of the total halocarbon RF (see Table 8.2) . The 
indirect RF from the impacts of ODSs is discussed in Section 8.3.3.2.
8.3.2.4.1	
Chlorofluorocarbons and hydrochlorofluorocarbons
The CFCs and HCFCs contribute approximately 11% of the WMGHG 
RF. Although emissions have been drastically reduced for CFCs, their 
long lifetimes mean that reductions take substantial time to affect their 
concentrations. The RF from CFCs has declined since 2005 (mainly due 
to a reduction in the concentrations of CFC-11 and CFC-12), whereas 
the RF from HCFCs is still rising (mainly due to HCFC-22).
8.3.2.4.2	
Hydrofluorocarbons
The RF of HFCs is 0.02 W m–2 and has close to doubled since AR4 (2005 
concentrations). HFC-134a is the dominant contributor to RF of the 
HFCs, with an RF of 0.01 W m–2.
8.3.2.4.3	
Perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride
These gases have lifetimes of thousands to tens of thousands of years 
(Table 8.A.1); therefore emissions essentially accumulate in the atmos­
phere on the time scales considered here. CF4 has a natural source and 
a 1750 concentration of 35 ppt (see Section 2.2.1.1.4). These gases 
currently contribute 0.01 W m–2 of the total WMGHG RF.
8.3.2.4.4	
New species
Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) is used in the electronics industry and sulfuryl 
fluoride (SO2F2) is used as a fumigant. Both have rapidly increasing 
emissions and high GWPs, but currently contribute only around 0.0002 
W m–2 and 0.0003 W m–2 to anthropogenic RF, respectively (Weiss et 
al., 2008; Andersen et al., 2009; Muhle et al., 2009; Arnold et al., 2013).
8.3.3	
Ozone and Stratospheric Water Vapour
Unlike for the WMGHGs, the estimate of the tropospheric and strato­
spheric ozone concentration changes are almost entirely model based 
for the full pre-industrial to present-day interval (though, especially for 
the stratosphere, more robust observational evidence on changes is 
available for recent decades; see Section 2.2).
AR4 assessed the RF (for 1750–2005) from tropospheric ozone to be 
0.35 W m–2 from multi-model studies with a high 95th percentile of 
0.65 W m–2 to allow for the possibility of model overestimates of the 
pre-industrial tropospheric ozone levels. The stratospheric ozone RF 
was assessed from observational trends from 1979 to 1998 to be –0.05 
± 0.1 W m–2, with the 90% confidence range increased to reflect uncer­
tainty in the trend prior to 1979 and since 1998. In AR4 the RF from 
stratospheric water vapour generated by CH4 oxidation was assessed 
to be +0.07 ± 0.05 W m–2 based on Hansen et al. (2005).
Since AR4, there have been a few individual studies of tropospheric 
or stratospheric ozone forcing (Shindell et al., 2006a, 2006c, 2013a; 
Skeie et al., 2011a; Søvde et al., 2011), a multi-model study of strat­
ospheric ozone RF in the 2010 WMO stratospheric ozone assessment 
(Forster et al., 2011b), and the ACCMIP multi-model study of tropo­
spheric and tropospheric + stratospheric chemistry models (Conley et 
al., 2013; Stevenson et al., 2013). There is now greater understanding 
of how tropospheric ozone precursors can affect stratospheric ozone, 
and how ODSs can affect tropospheric ozone (Shindell et al., 2013a). 
We assess the total ozone RF to be +0.35 (0.15 to 0.55) W m–2. This 
can be split according to altitude or by emitted species (Shindell et 
al., 2013a). We assess these contributions to be 0.40 (0.20 to 0.60) W 
m–2 for ozone in the troposphere and –0.05 ± 0.10 W m–2 for ozone in 
the stratosphere based on the studies presented in Table 8.3. Alterna­
tively, the contributions to the total ozone forcing can be attributed 
as 0.50 (0.30 to 0.70) W m–2 from ozone precursors and –0.15 (–0.3 
to 0.0) W m–2 from the effect of ODSs. The value attributed to ODSs is 
assessed to be slightly smaller in magnitude than in the two studies 
quoted in Table 8.3 (Søvde et al., 2011; Shindell et al., 2013a) because 
the models used for these had stratospheric ozone RFs with higher 
magnitudes than the ACCMIP mean (Conley et al., 2013). Differences 
between the ERFs and RFs for tropospheric and stratospheric ozone 
are likely to be small compared to the uncertainties in the RFs (Shin­
dell et al., 2013b), so the assessed values for the ERFs are the same 
as those for the RFs.
The influence of climate change is typically included in ozone RF esti­
mates as those are based on modelled concentration changes, but the 
available literature provides insufficient evidence for the sign and mag­
nitude of the impact and we therefore refrain from giving an estimate 
except to assess that it is very likely to be smaller than the overall 
uncertainty in the total RF. Unlike the WMGHGs, there are significant 
latitudinal variations in the RFs from changes in tropospheric and strat­
ospheric ozone. The implications of inhomogeneous RFs are explored 
in more detail in Section 8.6.
There has been one study since AR4 (Myhre et al., 2007) on the RF from 
water vapour formed from the stratospheric oxidation of CH4 (Section 
8.3.3.3). This is consistent with the AR4 value and so has not led to 
any change in the recommended value of 0.07 (0.02 to 0.12) W m–2 
since AR4.
8.3.3.1	 Tropospheric Ozone
Ozone is formed in the troposphere by photochemical reactions of nat­
ural and anthropogenic precursor species (Section 8.2.3.1). Changes in 
ozone above the tropopause due to emissions of stratospheric ODSs 
can also affect ozone in the troposphere either by transport across 
the tropopause or modification of photolysis rates. Changes in climate 
have also affected tropospheric ozone concentrations (medium evi­
dence, low agreement) through changes in chemistry, natural emis­
sions and transport from the stratosphere (Isaksen et al., 2009).
The most recent estimates of tropospheric ozone RF come from 
­multi-model studies under ACCMIP (Conley et al., 2013; Lamarque et 
al., 2013; Stevenson et al., 2013). The model ensemble reported only 
1850–2000 RFs (0.34 W m–2) so the single-model results from Skeie et
=== PAGE 22 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
680
al. (2011a) were used to expand the timespan to 1750–2010, adding 
0.04 W m–2, and 0.02 W m–2 to account for the periods 1750–1850 and 
2000–2010 respectively. The best estimate of tropospheric ozone RF 
taking into account the ACCMIP models and the Søvde et al. (2011) 
results (the Skeie et al. (2011a) and Shindell et al. (2013a) models are 
included in ACCMIP) is 0.40 (0.20 to 0.60) W m–2. The quantifiable 
uncertainties come from the inter-model spread (–0.11 to 0.11 W m–2) 
and the differences between radiative transfer models (–0.07 to 0.07 
W m–2); all 5 to 95% confidence interval. Additional uncertainties arise 
from the lack of knowledge of pre-industrial emissions and the rep­
resentation of chemical and physical processes beyond those included 
in the current models. The tropospheric ozone RF is sensitive to the 
assumed ‘pre-industrial’ levels. As described in Section 8.2.3.1, very 
limited late 19th and early 20th century observations of surface ozone 
concentrations are lower than the ACCMIP models for the same period; 
however, we assess that those observations are very uncertain. Skeie 
et al. (2011a) and Stevenson et al. (2013) increase their uncertainty 
ranges to 30% for 1 standard deviation which is equivalent to (–50% 
to +50%) for the 5 to 95% confidence range and we adopt this for 
AR5. The overall confidence in the tropospheric ozone RF is assessed 
as high.
Because we have low confidence in the pre-industrial ozone observa­
tions, and these were extremely limited in spatial coverage, it is not 
possible to calculate a purely observationally based ozone RF. However, 
modern observations can be used to assess the performance of the 
chemistry models. Bowman et al. (2013) used satellite retrievals from 
the TES instrument to constrain the RF from the ACCMIP models. This 
reduced the inter-model uncertainty by 30%; however, we still main­
tain overall the (–50% to +50%) 5 to 95% confidence range for AR5.
The time evolution of the tropospheric ozone forcing is shown in Figure 
8.7. There is a noticeable acceleration in the forcing after 1950 and a 
deceleration in the 1990s reflecting the time evolution of anthropo­
genic precursor emissions. Observational evidence for trends in ozone 
concentrations is discussed in Section 2.2.2.3.
It can be useful to calculate a normalized radiative forcing (NRF) which 
is an RF per change in ozone column in W m–2 DU–1 or W mol–1. This is 
only an approximation as the NRF is sensitive to the vertical profile 
of the ozone change and to the latitudinal profile to a smaller extent. 
From Table 8.3 we assess the NRF to be 0.042 (0.037 to 0.047) W m–2 
DU–1 (94 (83 to 105) W mol–1) similar to the value of 0.042 W m–2 DU–1 
(94 W mol–1) in TAR (Ramaswamy et al., 2001).
A small number of studies have looked at attributing the ozone chang­
es among the anthropogenically emitted species. Søvde et al. (2011) 
report a tropospheric ozone RF of 0.38 W m–2, 0.44 W m–2 from ozone 
precursors and –0.06 W m–2 from the impact of stratospheric ozone 
depletion on the troposphere. Shindell et al. (2013a) also calculate 
that ODSs are responsible for about –0.06 W m–2 of the tropospher­
ic ozone RF, and ozone precursors for about 0.41 W m–2. Six of the 
models in Stevenson et al. (2013) and Shindell et al. (2009) performed 
experiments to attribute the ozone RF to the individual precursor emis­
sions. An average of these seven model results leads to attributions of 
0.24 ± 0.13 W m–2 due to CH4 emissions, 0.14 ± 0.09 W m–2 from NOX 
emissions, 0.07 ± 0.03 W m–2 from CO, and 0.04 ± 0.03W m–2 from 
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ozone Radiative Forcing  W m-2
Tropospheric
Total
Stratospheric
(         )
non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs). These results 
were calculated by reducing the precursor emissions individually from 
2000 to pre-industrial levels. The results were scaled by the total ozone 
RFs attributed to ozone precursors (0.50 W m–2) to give the contri­
butions to the full 1750–2010 RF. Because of the nonlinearity of the 
chemistry an alternative method of starting from pre-industrial con­
ditions and increasing precursor emissions singly may give a different 
result. Note that as well as inducing an ozone RF, these ozone pre­
cursor species can also strongly affect the concentrations of CH4 and 
aerosols, adding extra terms (both positive and negative) to their total 
indirect forcings. The contributions to the 1750–2010 CH4 RF are again 
based on Stevenson et al. (2013) and Shindell et al. (2009). The Steven­
son et al. (2013) values are for 1850–2000 rather than 1750 to 2011 
so for these we distribute the CH4 RF for 1750–1850 and 2000–2011 
(0.06 W m–2) by scaling the CH4 and CO contributions (assuming these 
were the most significant contributors over those time periods). This 
gives contributions of 0.58 ± 0.08, –0.29 ± 0.18, 0.07 ± 0.02 and 0.02 
± 0.02 W m–2 for changes from historical to present day emissions of 
CH4 (inferred emissions), NOX, CO and VOCs respectively (uncertainties 
are 5 to 95% confidence intervals). The difference between the total 
CH4 RF attributed to ozone precursors here (0.38 W m–2) and the value 
calculated from CH4 concentration changes in Table 8.2 (0.48 W m–2) 
is due to nonlinearities in the CH4 chemistry because large single-step 
changes were used. To allow an easier comparison between the con­
centration-based and emission-based approaches in Section 8.5.1 the 
nonlinear term (+0.1 W m–2) is distributed between the four emitted 
species according to their absolute magnitude so that they total 0.48 
W m–2. The scaled results still lie within the uncertainty bounds of the 
values quoted above. The impact of climate change over the historical 
period on CH4 oxidation is not accounted for in these calculations.
Tropospheric ozone can also affect the natural uptake of CO2 by 
decreasing plant productivity (see Sections 6.4.8.2 and 8.2.3.1) and 
it is found that this indirect effect could have contributed to the total 
CO2 RF (Section 8.3.2.1; Sitch et al., 2007), roughly doubling the over­
all RF attributed to ozone precursors. Although we assess there to be 
Figure 8.7 |  Time evolution of the radiative forcing from tropospheric and stratospheric 
ozone from 1750 to 2010. Tropospheric ozone data are from Stevenson et al. (2013) 
scaled to give 0.40 W m–2 at 2010. The stratospheric ozone RF follow the functional 
shape of the Effective Equivalent Stratospheric Chlorine assuming a 3-year age of air 
(Daniel et al., 2010) scaled to give –0.05 W m–2 at 2010.
=== PAGE 23 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
681
Notes:
a	 From multi-model results.
b	 From Randel and Wu (2007) observation-based data set.
c	
Using the REF chemistry, see Søvde et al. (2011).
d	 Using the R2 chemistry.
e	 The Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model Intercomparison Project (ACCMIP) tropospheric ozone RFs are from Stevenson et al. (2013). The stratospheric ozone values are from 
Conley et al. (2013) calculations for 1850–2005 disregarding the Modèle de Chimie Atmosphérique a Grande Echelle (MOCAGE) model which showed excessive ozone depletion.
f	
Only the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS)-E2-R results (including bias correction) from the Shindell et al. (2013a) study are shown here rather than the multi-model result
presented in that paper.
Table 8.3 |  Contributions of tropospheric and stratospheric ozone changes to radiative forcing (W m–2) from 1750 to 2011.
Troposphere
Stratosphere
Longwave
Shortwave
Total
Normalized
Radiative Forcing 
m W m–2 DU–1
Longwave
Shortwave
Total
AR4 (Forster 
et al. (2007)
0.35
(0.25 to 0.65)
–0.05
(–0.15 to 0.05)
Shindell et al. 
(2013a)f
0.33
(0.31 to 0.35)
–0.08
(–0.10 to –0.06)
WMO (Forster 
et al., 2011b)
–0.03a
(–0.23 to +0.17)
+0.03b
Søvde et al. (2011)
0.45c
40
–0.12 
0.38d
39
–0.12
Skeie et al. (2011a)
0.41
(0.21 to 0.61)
38
ACCMIPe
0.33
(0.24 to 0.42)
0.08
(0.06 to 0.10)
0.41
(0.21 to 0.61)
42
(37 to 47)
–0.13
(–0.26 to 0)
0.11
(0.03 to 0.19)
–0.02
(–0.09 to 0.05)
AR5
0.40
(0.20 to 0.60)
42
(37 to 47)
–0.05
(-0.15 to 0.05)
robust evidence of an effect, we make no assessment of the magnitude 
because of lack of further corroborating studies.
8.3.3.2	 Stratospheric Ozone
The decreases in stratospheric ozone due to anthropogenic emissions 
of ODSs have a positive RF in the shortwave (increasing the flux into 
the troposphere) and a negative RF in the longwave. This leaves a 
residual forcing that is the difference of two larger terms. In the lower 
stratosphere the longwave effect tends to be larger, whereas in the 
upper stratosphere the shortwave dominates. Thus whether strat­
ospheric ozone depletion has contributed an overall net positive or 
negative forcing depends on the vertical profile of the change (Forster 
and Shine, 1997). WMO (2011) assessed the RF from 1979 to 2005 
from observed ozone changes (Randel and Wu, 2007) and results from 
16 models for the 1970s average to 2004. The observed and modelled 
mean ozone changes gave RF values of different signs (see Table 8.3). 
Negative net RFs arise from models with ozone decline in the lower­
most stratosphere, particularly at or near the tropopause.
The ACCMIP study also included some models with stratospheric 
chemistry (Conley et al., 2013). One model in that study stood out as 
having excessive ozone depletion. Removing that model leaves a strat­
ospheric ozone RF of –0.02 (–0.09 to 0.05) W m–2. These results are in 
good agreement with the model studies from WMO (2011). Forster et 
al. (2007) in AR4 calculated a forcing of –0.05 W m–2 from observa­
tions over the period 1979–1998 and increased the uncertainty to 0.10 
W m–2 to encompass changes between the pre-industrial period and 
2005. The RF from stratospheric ozone due to changes in emissions 
of ozone precursors and ODSs is here assessed to be –0.05 (–0.15 to 
0.05) taking into account all the studies listed in Table 8.3. This is in 
agreement with AR4, although derived from different data. The time­
line of stratospheric ozone forcing is shown in Figure 8.7, making the 
assumption that it follows the trajectory of the changes in EESC. It 
reaches a minimum in the late 1990s and starts to recover after that.
The net global RF from ODSs taking into account the compensating 
effects on ozone and their direct effects as WMGHGs is 0.18 (0.03 to 
0.33) W m–2. The patterns of RF for these two effects are different so 
the small net global RF comprises areas of positive and negative RF.
8.3.3.3	 Stratospheric Water Vapour
Stratospheric water vapour is dependent on the amount entering from 
the tropical troposphere and from direct injection by volcanic plumes 
(Joshi and Jones, 2009) and aircraft, and the in situ chemical pro­
duction from the oxidation of CH4 and hydrogen. This contrasts with 
tropospheric water vapour which is almost entirely controlled by the 
balance between evaporation and precipitation (see FAQ 8.1). We con­
sider trends in the transport (for instance, due to the Brewer–Dobson 
circulation or tropopause temperature changes) to be climate feedback 
rather than a forcing so the anthropogenic RFs come from oxidation of 
CH4 and hydrogen, and emissions from stratospheric aircraft.
Myhre et al. (2007) used observations of the vertical profile of CH4 to 
deduce a contribution from oxidation of anthropogenic CH4 of 0.083
=== PAGE 24 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
682
W m–2 which compares with the value of 0.07 W m–2 from calcula­
tions in a 2D model in Hansen et al. (2005). Both of these values are 
consistent with AR4 which obtained the stratospheric water vapour 
forcing by scaling the CH4 direct forcing by 15%. Thus the time evolu­
tion of this forcing is also obtained by scaling the CH4 forcing by 15%. 
The best estimate and uncertainty range from AR4 of 0.07 (0.02 to 
0.12) W m–2 remain unchanged and the large uncertainty range is due 
to large differences found in the intercomparison studies of radiative 
transfer modelling for changes in stratospheric water vapour (see Sec­
tion 8.3.1).
RF from the current aircraft fleet through stratospheric water vapour 
emissions is very small. Wilcox et al. (2012) estimate a contribution 
from civilian aircraft in 2005 of 0.0009 (0.0003 to 0.0013) W m–2 
with high confidence in the upper limit. Water vapour emissions from 
aircraft in the troposphere also contribute to contrails which are dis­
cussed in Section 8.3.4.5.
8.3.4	
Aerosols and Cloud Effects
8.3.4.1	 Introduction and Summary of AR4
In AR4 (Forster et al., 2007), RF estimates were provided for three aer­
osol effects. These were the RF of aerosol–radiation interaction (previ­
ously denoted as direct aerosol effect), RF of the aerosol–cloud inter­
action (previously denoted as the cloud albedo effect), and the impact 
of BC on snow and ice surface albedo. See Chapter 7 and Figure 7.3 for 
an explanation of the change in terminology between AR4 and AR5. 
The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction is scattering and absorp­
tion of shortwave and longwave radiation by atmospheric aerosols. 
Several different aerosol types from various sources are present in the 
atmosphere (see Section 8.2). Most of the aerosols primarily scatter 
solar radiation, but some components absorb solar radiation to various 
extents with BC as the most absorbing component. RF of aerosols in 
the troposphere is often calculated at the TOA because it is similar to 
tropopause values (Forster et al., 2007). A best estimate RF of –0.5 ± 
0.4 W m–2 was given in AR4 for the change in the net aerosol–radia­
tion interaction between 1750 and 2005 and a medium to low level of 
scientific understanding (LOSU).
An increase in the hygroscopic aerosol abundance may enhance the 
concentration of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). This may increase 
the cloud albedo and under the assumption of fixed cloud water con­
tent this effect was given a best estimate of –0.7 W m–2 (range from 
–1.8 to –0.3) in AR4 and a low LOSU.
BC in the snow or ice can lead to a decrease of the surface albedo. 
This leads to a positive RF. In AR4 this mechanism was given a best RF 
estimate of 0.1 ± 0.1 W m–2 and a low LOSU.
Impacts on clouds from the ERF of aerosol–cloud interaction (includ­
ing both effects previously denoted as cloud lifetime and cloud albedo 
effect) and the ERF of aerosol–radiation interaction (including both 
effects previously denoted as direct aerosol effect and semi-direct 
effect) were not strictly in accordance with the RF concept, because 
they involve tropospheric changes in variables other than the forcing 
agent at least in the available model estimates, so no best RF ­estimates 
were provided in AR4 (see Section 8.1). However, the ERF of aerosol–
cloud and aerosol–radiation interactions were included in the discus­
sion of total aerosol effect in Chapter 7 in AR4 (Denman et al., 2007). 
The mechanisms influenced by anthropogenic aerosol including the 
aerosol cloud interactions are discussed in detail in this assessment in 
Section 7.5 and summarized in the subsections that follow.
8.3.4.2	 Radiation Forcing of the Aerosol–Radiation
Interaction by Component
Based on a combination of global aerosol models and observa­
tion-based methods, the best RF estimate of the aerosol–radiation 
interaction in AR5 is –0.35 (–0.85 to +0.15) W m–2 (see Section 7.5). 
This estimate is thus smaller in magnitude than in AR4, however; with 
larger uncertainty range. Overall, the estimate compared to AR4 is 
more robust because the agreement between estimates from models 
and observation-based methods is much greater (see Section 7.5). The 
larger range arises primarily from analysis by observation-based meth­
ods (see Section 7.5).
The main source of the model estimate is based on updated simula­
tions in AeroCom (Myhre et al., 2013), which is an intercomparison 
exercise of a large set of global aerosol models that includes extensive 
evaluation against measurements. The assessment in Chapter 7 relies 
to a large extent on this study for the separation in the various aerosol 
components, except for BC where the assessment in Chapter 7 relies in 
addition on Bond et al. (2013). The RF of aerosol–radiation interaction 
is separated into seven components in this report; namely sulphate, 
BC from fossil fuel and biofuel, OA from fossil fuel and biofuel, BC and 
OA combined from biomass burning (BB), nitrate, SOA and mineral 
dust. BC and OA from biomass burning are combined due to the joint 
sources, whereas treated separately for fossil fuel and biofuel because 
there is larger variability in the ratio of BC to OA in the fossil fuel 
and biofuel emissions. This approach is consistent with TAR and AR4. 
Table 8.4 compares the best estimates of RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction for various components in this report with values in SAR, 
TAR and AR4. In magnitude the sulphate and BC from use of fossil fuel 
and biofuel dominate. It is important to note that the BB RF is small in 
magnitude but consists of larger, offsetting terms in magnitude from 
OA and BC (see Section 7.5.2). Changes in the estimates of RF due to 
aerosol–radiation interaction of the various components have been 
rather modest compared to AR4, except for BC from fossil fuel and 
biofuel (see Section 7.5). SOA is a new component compared to AR4. 
Anthropogenic SOA precursors contribute only modestly to the anthro­
pogenic change in SOA. The increase in SOA is mostly from biogenic 
precursors and enhanced partitioning of SOA into existing particles 
from anthropogenic sources and changes in the atmospheric oxidation 
(Carlton et al., 2010). This change in SOA is therefore of anthropogenic 
origin, but natural emission of SOA precursors is important (Hoyle et 
al., 2011).
Note that the best estimate and the uncertainty for the total is not 
equal to the sum of the aerosol components because the total is 
estimated based on a combination of methods (models and observa­
tion-based methods), whereas the estimates for the components rely 
mostly on model estimates.
=== PAGE 25 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
683
Global Mean Radiative Forcing (W m–2)
SAR
TAR
AR4
AR5
Sulphate aerosol
–0.40 (–0.80 to –0.20)
–0.40 (–0.80 to –0.20)
–0.40 (–0.60 to –0.20)
–0.40 (–0.60 to –0.20)
Black carbon aerosol from 
fossil fuel and biofuel 
+0.10 (+0.03 to +0.30)
+0.20 (+0.10 to +0.40)
+0.20 (+0.05 to +0.35)
+0.40 (+0.05 to +0.80)
Primary organic aerosol 
from fossil fuel and biofuel 
Not estimated
–0.10 (–0.30 to –0.03)
–0.05 (0.00 to –0.10)
–0.09 (–0.16 to –0.03) 
Biomass burning
–0.20 (–0.60 to –0.07)
–0.20 (–0.60 to –0.07) 
+0.03(–0.09 to +0.15)
–0.0 (–0.20 to +0.20)
Secondary organic aerosol
Not estimated
Not estimated
Not estimated
–0.03 (–0.27 to +0.20)
Nitrate
Not estimated
Not estimated
–0.10 (–0.20 to 0.00)
–0.11 (–0.30 to –0.03) 
Dust
Not estimated
–0.60 to +0.40
–0.10 (–0.30 to +0.10)
–0.10 (–0.30 to +0.10) 
Total
Not estimated
Not estimated
–0.50 (–0.90 to –0.10)
–0.35 (–0.85 to +0.15) 
The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction during some time periods is 
more uncertain than the current RF. Improvements in the observations 
of aerosols have been substantial with availability of remote sensing 
from the ground-based optical observational network AErosol RObotic 
NETwork (AERONET) and the launch of the Moderate Resolution Imag­
ing Spectrometer (MODIS) and Multi-angle Imaging Spectro-Radiom­
eter (MISR) instruments (starting in 2000) as well as other satellite 
data. This has contributed to constraining the current RF using aerosol 
observations. The aerosol observations are very limited backward in 
time, although there is growing constraint coming from new ice and 
Table 8.4 |  Global and annual mean RF  (W m–2) due to aerosol–radiation interaction between 1750 and 2011 of seven aerosol components for AR5. Values and uncertainties 
from SAR, TAR, AR4 and AR5 are provided when available. Note that for SAR, TAR and AR4 the end year is somewhat different than for AR5 with 1993, 1998 and 2005, respectively.
1850
1900
1950
2000
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Radiative Forcing  W m-2
Sulfate
BC
OC
BioBurn
Nitrate
SOA
BC on snow
Total Aerosols
-0.60
 0.80
-0.81
(        )
lake core records, and uncertainties in the historical emission of aero­
sols and their precursors used in the global aerosol modeling are larger 
than for current conditions. Emissions of carbonaceous aerosols are 
particularly uncertain in the 1800s due to a significant biofuel source in 
this period, in contrast to the SO2 emissions which were very small until 
the end of the 1800s. The uncertainty in the biomass burning emissions 
also increases backward in time. Note that, for 1850, the biomass burn­
ing emissions from Lamarque et al. (2010) are quite different from the 
previous estimates, but RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction is close 
to zero for this component. Figure 8.8 shows an example of the time 
evolution of the RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction as a total and 
separated into six aerosol components. From 1950 to 1990 there was 
a strengthening of the total RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction, 
mainly due to a strong enhancement of the sulphate RF. After 1990 the 
change has been small with even a weakening of the RF due to aero­
sol–radiation interaction, mainly due to a stronger BC RF as a result of 
increased emissions in East and Southeast Asia.
8.3.4.3	 Aerosol–Cloud Interactions
The RF by aerosol effects on cloud albedo was previously referred to 
as the Twomey or cloud albedo effect (see Section 7.1). Although this 
RF can be calculated, no estimate of this forcing is given because it 
has heuristic value only and does not simply translate to the ERF due 
to aerosol–cloud interaction. The total aerosol ERF, namely ERF due 
to aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions (excluding BC on 
snow and ice) provided in Chapter 7 is estimated with a 5 to 95% 
uncertainty between –1.9 and –0.1 W m–2 with a best estimate value 
of –0.9 W m–2 (medium confidence). The likely range of this forcing 
is between –1.5 and –0.4 W m–2. The estimate of ERF due to aero­
sol–radiation and aerosol-cloud interaction is lower (i.e., less negative) 
than the corresponding AR4 RF estimate of –1.2 W m–2 because the 
latter was based mainly on GCM studies that did not take secondary 
processes (such as aerosol effects on mixed-phase and/or convective 
clouds and effects on longwave radiation) into account. This new best 
estimate of ERF due to aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interac­
tion is also consistent with the studies allowing cloud-scale process­
es and related responses and with the lower estimates of this forcing 
inferred from satellite observations.
Figure 8.8 |  Time evolution of RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction and BC on 
snow and ice. Multi-model results for 1850, 1930, 1980 and 2000 from ACCMIP for 
aerosol–radiation interaction (Shindell et al., 2013c) and BC on snow and ice (Lee et al., 
2013) are combined with higher temporal-resolution results from the Goddard Institute 
for Space Studies (GISS)-E2 and Oslo-Chemical Transport Model 2 (OsloCTM2) models 
(aerosol–radiation interaction) and OsloCTM2 (BC on snow and ice). Uncertainty ranges 
(5 to 95%) for year 2010 are shown with vertical lines. Values next to the uncertainty 
lines are for cases where uncertainties go beyond the scale. The total includes the RF 
due to aerosol–radiation interaction for six aerosol components and RF due to BC on 
snow and ice. All values have been scaled to the best estimates for 2011 given in Table 
8.4. Note that time evolution for mineral dust is not included and the total RF due to 
aerosol–radiation interaction is estimated based on simulations of the six other aerosol 
components.
=== PAGE 26 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
684
Frequently Asked Questions
FAQ 8.2 |  Do Improvements in Air Quality Have an Effect on Climate Change?
Yes they do, but depending on which pollutant(s) they limit, they can either cool or warm the climate. For example, 
whereas a reduction in sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions leads to more warming, nitrogen oxide (NOx) emission 
control has both a cooling (through reducing of tropospheric ozone) and a warming effect (due to its impact on 
methane lifetime and aerosol production). Air pollution can also affect precipitation patterns.
Air quality is nominally a measure of airborne surface pollutants, such as ozone, carbon monoxide, NOx and aerosols 
(solid or liquid particulate matter). Exposure to such pollutants exacerbates respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, 
harms plants and damages buildings. For these reasons, most major urban centres try to control discharges of air­
borne pollutants.
Unlike carbon dioxide (CO2) and other well-mixed greenhouse gases, tropospheric ozone and aerosols may last in 
the atmosphere only for a few days to a few weeks, though indirect couplings within the Earth system can prolong 
their impact. These pollutants are usually most potent near their area of emission or formation, where they can 
force local or regional perturbations to climate, even if their globally averaged effect is small.
Air pollutants affect climate differently according to their physical and chemical characteristics. Pollution-generated 
greenhouse gases will impact climate primarily through shortwave and longwave radiation, while aerosols can in 
addition affect climate through cloud–aerosol interactions.
Controls on anthropogenic emissions of methane (FAQ 8.2, Figure 1) to lower surface ozone have been identified as 
‘win–win’ situations. Consequences of controlling other ozone precursors are not always as clear. NOx emission con­
trols, for instance, might be expected to have a cooling effect as they reduce tropospheric ozone, but their impact 
on CH4 lifetime and aerosol formation is more likely instead to cause overall warming.
Satellite observations have identified increasing atmospheric concentrations of SO2 (the primary precursor to scat­
tering sulphate aerosols) from coal-burning power plants over eastern Asia during the last few decades. The most 
recent power plants use scrubbers to reduce such emissions (albeit not the concurrent CO2 emissions and associated 
long-term climate warming). This improves air quality, but also reduces the cooling effect of sulphate aerosols and 
therefore exacerbates warming. Aerosol cooling occurs through aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions 
and is estimated at –0.9 W m–2 (all aerosols combined, Section 8.3.4.3) since pre-industrial, having grown especially 
during the second half of the 20th century when anthropogenic emissions rose sharply. (continued on next page)
FAQ 8.2, Figure 1 |  Schematic diagram of the impact of pollution controls on specific emissions and climate impact. Solid black line indicates known impact; dashed 
line indicates uncertain impact.
Methane
Ammonia
Black 
carbon
Organic
carbon
Sulfur
dioxide
Carbon
monoxide
Nitrogen
oxides
VOCs
Cooling
Warming
Ozone pollution 
controls
Particulate 
matter controls
=== PAGE 27 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
685
One reason an expert judgment estimate of ERF due to aerosol–radi­
ation and aerosol–cloud interaction is provided rather than ERF due 
to aerosol–cloud interaction specifically is that the individual contri­
butions are very difficult to disentangle. These contributions are the 
response of processes that are the outputs from a system that is con­
stantly readjusting to multiple nonlinear forcings. Assumptions of inde­
pendence and linearity are required to deduce ERF due to aerosol–radi­
ation interaction and ERF due to aerosol–cloud interaction (although 
there is no a priori reason why the individual ERFs should be simply 
additive). Under these assumptions, ERF due to aerosol–cloud interac­
tion is deduced as the difference between ERF due to aerosol–radia­
tion and aerosol–cloud interaction and ERF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction alone. This yields an ERF due to aerosol–cloud interaction 
estimate of –0.45 W m–2 which is much smaller in magnitude than the 
–1.4 W m–2 median forcing value of the models summarized in Figure 
7.19 and is also smaller in magnitude than the AR4 estimates of –0.7 
W m–2 for RF due to aerosol–cloud interaction.
8.3.4.4	 Black Carbon Deposition in Snow and Ice
Because absorption by ice is very weak at visible and ultraviolet (UV) 
wavelengths, BC in snow makes the snow darker and increases absorp­
tion. This is not enough darkening to be seen by eye, but it is enough 
to be important for climate (Warren and Wiscombe, 1980; Clarke and 
Noone, 1985). Several studies since AR4 have re-examined this issue 
and find that the RF may be weaker than the estimates of Hansen 
and Nazarenko (2004) in AR4 (Flanner et al., 2007; Koch et al., 2009a; 
Rypdal et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2013). The anthropogenic BC on snow/
ice is assessed to have a positive global and annual mean RF of +0.04 
W m−2, with a 0.02–0.09 W m−2 5 to 95% uncertainty range (see fur­
ther description in Section 7.5.2.3). This RF has a two to four times 
larger global mean surface temperature change per unit forcing than 
a change in CO2.
In Figure 8.8, the time evolution of global mean RF due to BC on snow 
and ice is shown based on multi-model simulations in ACCMIP (Lee et 
al., 2013) for 1850, 1930, 1980 and 2000. The results show a maximum 
in the RF in 1980 with a small increase since 1850 and a 20% lower 
RF in 2000 compared to 1980. Those results are supported by obser­
vations. The BC concentration in the Arctic atmosphere is observed to 
be declining since 1990, at least in the Western Hemisphere portion 
(Sharma et al., 2004), which should lead to less deposition of BC on 
the snow surface. Surveys across Arctic during 1998 and 2005 to 2009 
showed that the BC content of Arctic snow appears to be lower than 
in 1984 (Doherty et al., 2010) and found BC concentrations in Canada, 
Alaska and the Arctic Ocean (e.g., Hegg et al., 2009), about a factor of 
2 lower than measured in the 1980s (e.g., Clarke and Noone, 1985). 
Large-area field campaigns (Huang et al., 2011; Ye et al., 2012) found 
that the BC content of snow in northeast China is comparable to values 
found in Europe. The steep drop off in BC content of snow with latitude 
in northeast China may indicate that there is not much BC in the Arctic 
coming from China (Huang et al., 2011; Ye et al., 2012; Wang et al., 
2013). The change in the spatial pattern of emission of BC is a main 
cause for the difference in the temporal development of RF due to BC 
on snow and ice compared to the BC from RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction over the last decades.
FAQ 8.2 (continued)
Black carbon or soot, on the other hand, absorbs heat in the atmosphere (leading to a 0.4 W m–2 radiative forcing 
from anthropogenic fossil and biofuel emissions) and, when deposited on snow, reduces its albedo, or ability to 
reflect sunlight. Reductions of black carbon emissions can therefore have a cooling effect, but the additional inter­
action of black carbon with clouds is uncertain and could lead to some counteracting warming.
Air quality controls might also target a specific anthropogenic activity sector, such as transportation or energy pro­
duction. In that case, co-emitted species within the targeted sector lead to a complex mix of chemistry and climate 
perturbations. For example, smoke from biofuel combustion contains a mixture of both absorbing and scattering 
particles as well as ozone precursors, for which the combined climate impact can be difficult to ascertain.
Thus, surface air quality controls will have some consequences on climate. Some couplings between the targeted 
emissions and climate are still poorly understood or identified, including the effects of air pollutants on precipi­
tation patterns, making it difficult to fully quantify these consequences. There is an important twist, too, in the 
potential effect of climate change on air quality. In particular, an observed correlation between surface ozone 
and temperature in polluted regions indicates that higher temperatures from climate change alone could worsen 
summertime pollution, suggesting a ‘climate penalty’. This penalty implies stricter surface ozone controls will be 
required to achieve a specific target. In addition, projected changes in the frequency and duration of stagnation 
events could impact air quality conditions. These features will be regionally variable and difficult to assess, but 
better understanding, quantification and modelling of these processes will clarify the overall interaction between 
air pollutants and climate.
=== PAGE 28 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
686
8.3.4.5	 Contrails and Contrail-Induced Cirrus
AR4 assessed the RF of contrails (persistent linear contrails) as +0.01 
(–0.007 to +0.02) W m–2 and provided no estimate for contrail induced 
cirrus. In AR5, Chapter 7 gives a best estimate of RF due to contrails of 
+0.01 (+0.005 to +0.03) W m–2 and an ERF estimate of the combined 
contrails and contrail-induced cirrus of +0.05 (+0.02 to +0.15) W 
m–2. Since AR4, the evidence for contrail-induced cirrus has increased 
because of observational studies (for further details see Section 7.2.7).
8.3.5	
Land Surface Changes
8.3.5.1	 Introduction
Anthropogenic land cover change has a direct impact on the Earth radi­
ation budget through a change in the surface albedo. It also impacts 
the climate through modifications in the surface roughness, latent heat 
flux and river runoff. In addition, human activity may change the water 
cycle through irrigation and power plant cooling, and also generate 
direct input of heat to the atmosphere by consuming energy. Land use 
change, and in particular deforestation, also has significant impacts on 
WMGHG concentration, which are discussed in Section 6.3.2.2. Poten­
tial geo-engineering techniques that aim at increasing the surface 
albedo are discussed in Section 7.7.2.3.
AR4 referenced a large number of RF estimates resulting from a change 
in land cover albedo. It discussed the uncertainties due to the recon­
struction of historical vegetation, the characterization of present-day 
vegetation and the surface radiation processes. On this basis, AR4 gave 
a best estimate of RF relative to 1750 due to land use related surface 
albedo at –0.2 ± 0.2 W m–2 with a level of scientific understanding at 
medium-low.
8.3.5.2	 Land Cover Changes
Hurtt et al. (2006) estimates that 42 to 68% of the global land sur­
face was impacted by land use activities (crop, pasture, wood harvest) 
during the 1700–2000 period. Until the mid-20th century most land 
use change took place over the temperate regions of the NH. Since 
then, reforestation is observed in Western Europe, North America and 
China as a result of land abandonment and afforestation efforts, while 
deforestation is concentrated in the tropics. After a rapid increase of 
the rate of deforestation during the 1980s and 1990s, satellite data 
indicate a slowdown in the past decade (FAO, 2012).
Since AR4, Pongratz et al. (2008) and Kaplan et al. (2011) extended 
existing reconstructions on land use back in time to the past millenni­
um, accounting for the progress of agriculture technique and historical 
events such as the black death or war invasions. As agriculture was 
already widespread over Europe and South Asia by 1750, the RF, which 
is defined with respect to this date, is weaker than the radiative flux 
change from the state of natural vegetation cover (see Figure 8.9). 
Deforestation in Europe and Asia during the last millennium led to a 
significant regional negative forcing. Betts et al. (2007) and Goosse 
et al. (2006) argue that it probably contributed to the ‘Little Ice Age’, 
together with natural solar and volcanic activity components, before 
the increase in GHG concentration led to temperatures similar to those 
experienced in the early part of the second millennium. There is still 
significant uncertainty in the anthropogenic land cover change, and in 
particular its time evolution (Gaillard et al., 2010).
8.3.5.3	 Surface Albedo and Radiative Forcing
Surface albedo is the ratio between reflected and incident solar flux 
at the surface. It varies with the surface cover. Most forests are darker 
(i.e., lower albedo) than grasses and croplands, which are darker 
than barren land and desert. As a consequence, deforestation tends 
to increase the Earth albedo (negative RF) while cultivation of some 
bright surfaces may have the opposite effect. Deforestation also leads 
to a large increase in surface albedo in case of snow cover as low vege­
tation accumulates continuous snow cover more readily in early winter 
allowing it to persist longer in spring. This causes average winter 
albedo in deforested areas to be generally much higher than that of a 
tree-covered landscape (Bernier et al., 2011).
The pre-industrial impact of the Earth albedo increase due to land use 
change, including the reduced snow masking by tall vegetation, is esti­
mated to be on the order of –0.05 W m–2 (Pongratz et al., 2009). Since 
then, the increase in world population and agriculture development 
led to additional forcing. Based on reconstruction of land use since the 
beginning of the Industrial Era, Betts et al. (2007) and Pongratz et al. 
(2009) computed spatially and temporally distributed estimates of the 
land use RF. They estimate that the shortwave flux change induced by 
the albedo variation, from fully natural vegetation state to 1992, is on 
the order of –0.2 W m–2 (range –0.24 to –0.21W m–2). The RF, defined 
with respect to 1750, is in the range –0.17 to –0.18 W m–2. A slightly 
stronger value (–0.22 W m–2) was found by Davin et al. (2007) for the 
period 1860–1992.
In recent years, the availability of global scale MODIS data (Schaaf et 
al., 2002) has improved surface albedo estimates (Rechid et al., 2009). 
These data have been used by Myhre et al (2005a) and Kvalevag et al. 
(2010). They argue that the observed albedo difference between nat­
ural vegetation and croplands is less than usually assumed in climate 
simulations, so that the RF due to land use change is weaker than in 
estimates that do not use the satellite data. On the other hand, Nair et 
al. (2007) show observational evidence of an underestimate of the sur­
face albedo change in land use analysis in southwest Australia. Overall, 
there is still a significant range of RF estimates for the albedo com­
ponent of land use forcing. This is mostly due to the range of albedo 
change as a result of land use change, as shown in an inter-comparison 
of seven atmosphere–land models (de Noblet-Ducoudre et al., 2012).
Deforestation has a direct impact on the atmospheric CO2 concen­
tration and therefore contributes to the WMGHG RF as quantified in 
Section 8.3.2. Conversely, afforestation is a climate mitigation strate­
gy to limit the CO2 concentration increase. Several authors have com­
pared the radiative impact of deforestation/afforestation that results 
from the albedo change with the greenhouse effect of CO2 released/
sequestered. Pongratz et al. (2010) shows that the historic land use 
change has had a warming impact (i.e., greenhouse effect dominates) 
at the global scale and over most regions with the exception of Europe 
and India. Bala et al. (2007) results show latitudinal contrast where 
the greenhouse effect dominates for low-latitude deforestation while
=== PAGE 29 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
687
 
1992
 
1900
 
1750
-4.5 -3
-1
1
3 4.5
0
W m-2
1400
1600
1800
2000
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
SW flux change
(W m-2)
-0.1
0.0
Rad. forc. (W m-2)
1750
(        )
Figure 8.9 |  Change in top of the atmosphere (TOA) shortwave (SW) flux (W m–2) 
following the change in albedo as a result of anthropogenic Land Use Change for three 
periods (1750, 1900 and 1992 from top to bottom). By definition, the RF is with respect 
to 1750, but some anthropogenic changes had already occurred in 1750. The lower 
right inset shows the globally averaged impact of the surface albedo change to the TOA 
SW flux (left scale) as well as the corresponding RF (right scale) after normalization to 
the 1750 value. Based on simulations by Pongratz et al. (2009).
the combined effect of albedo and evapotranspiration impact does at 
high latitude. These results are also supported by Bathiany et al. (2010). 
Similarly, Lohila et al. (2010) shows that the afforestation of boreal 
peatlands results in a balanced RF between the albedo and green­
house effect. Overall, because of the opposite impacts, the potential of 
afforestation to mitigate climate change is limited (Arora and Monte­
negro, 2011) while it may have undesired impacts on the atmospheric 
circulation, shifting precipitation patterns (Swann et al., 2012).
8.3.5.4	 Other Impacts of Land Cover Change on the
Earth’s Albedo
Burn scars resulting from agriculture practices, uncontrolled fires or 
deforestation (Bowman et al., 2009) have a lower albedo than unper­
turbed vegetation (Jin and Roy, 2005). On the other hand, at high lat­
itude, burnt areas are more easily covered by snow, which may result 
in an overall increase of the surface albedo. Surface blackening of nat­
ural vegetation due to fire is relatively short lived and typically disap­
pears within one to a few years (Jin et al., 2012). Myhre et al. (2005b) 
­estimates a global albedo-related radiative effect due to African fires 
of 0.015 W m–2.
Over semi-arid areas, the development of agriculture favours the gen­
eration of dust. Mulitza et al. (2010) demonstrates a very large increase 
of dust emission and deposition in the Sahel concomitant with the 
development of agriculture in this area. This, together with the anal­
ysis of dust sources (Ginoux et al., 2010), suggests that a significant 
fraction of the dust that is transported over the Atlantic has an anthro­
pogenic origin and impacts the Earth albedo. There is no full estimate 
of the resulting RF, however. The dust RF estimate in Section 8.3.4.2 
includes both land use contributions and change in wind-driven emis­
sions. Both dust and biomass burning aerosol may impact the Earth 
surface albedo as these particles can be deposed on snow, which has 
a large impact on its absorption, in particular for soot. This is discussed 
in Section 8.3.4.4.
Urban areas have an albedo that is 0.01 to 0.02 smaller than adjacent 
croplands (Jin et al., 2005). There is the potential for a strong increase 
through white roof coating with the objective of mitigating the heat 
island effect (Oleson et al., 2010). Although the global scale impact is 
small, local effects can be very large, as shown by Campra et al. (2008) 
that reports a regional (260 km2) 0.09 increase in albedo and –20 W 
m–2 RF as a consequence of greenhouse horticulture development.
8.3.5.5	 Impacts of Surface Change on Climate
Davin et al. (2007) argues that the climate sensitivity to land use forc­
ing is lower than that for other forcings, due to its spatial distribution 
but also the role of non-radiative processes. Indeed, in addition to the 
impact on the surface albedo, land use change also modifies the evap­
oration and surface roughness, with counterbalancing consequences 
on the lower atmosphere temperature. There is increasing evidence 
that the impact of land use on evapotranspiration—a non-RF on cli­
mate—is comparable to, but of opposite sign than, the albedo effect, 
so that RF is not as useful a metric as it is for gases and aerosols. For 
instance, Findell et al. (2007) climate simulations show a negligible 
impact of land use change on the global mean temperature, although 
there are some significant regional changes.
Numerical climate experiments demonstrate that the impact of land use 
on climate is much more complex than just the RF. This is due in part 
to the very heterogeneous nature of land use change (Barnes and Roy, 
2008), but mostly due to the impact on the hydrological cycle through 
evapotranspiration, root depth and cloudiness (van der Molen et al., 
2011). As a consequence, the forcing on climate is not purely radiative 
and the net impact on the surface temperature may be either positive 
or negative depending on the latitude (Bala et al., 2007). Davin and de 
Noblet-Ducoudre (2010) analyses the impact on climate of large-scale 
deforestation; the albedo cooling effect dominates for high latitude 
whereas reduced evapotranspiration dominates in the tropics. This lat­
itudinal trend is confirmed by observations of the temperature differ­
ence between open land and nearby forested land (Lee et al., 2011).
Irrigated areas have continuously increased during the 20th century 
although a slowdown has been observed in recent decades ­(Bonfils
=== PAGE 30 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
688
and Lobell, 2007). There is clear evidence that irrigation leads to local 
cooling of several degrees (Kueppers et al., 2007). Irrigation also 
affects cloudiness and precipitation (Puma and Cook, 2010). In the 
United States, DeAngelis et al. (2010) found that irrigation in the Great 
Plains in the summer produced enhanced precipitation in the Midwest 
1000 km to the northeast.
8.3.5.6	 Conclusions
There is still a rather wide range of estimates of the albedo change 
due to anthropogenic land use change, and its RF. Although most 
published studies provide an estimate close to –0.2 W m–2, there is 
convincing evidence that it may be somewhat weaker as the albedo 
difference between natural and anthropogenic land cover may have 
been overestimated. In addition, non-radiative impact of land use have 
a similar magnitude, and may be of opposite sign, as the albedo effect 
(though these are not part of RF). A comparison of the impact of land 
use change according to seven climate models showed a wide range of 
results (Pitman et al., 2009), partly due to difference in the implemen­
tation of land cover change, but mostly due to different assumptions 
on ecosystem albedo, plant phenology and evapotranspiration. There 
is no agreement on the sign of the temperature change induced by 
anthropogenic land use change. It is very likely that land use change 
led to an increase of the Earth albedo with a RF of –0.15 ± 0.10 W m–2, 
but a net cooling of the surface—accounting for processes that are not 
limited to the albedo—is about as likely as not.
8.4	
Natural Radiative Forcing Changes:
Solar and Volcanic
Several natural drivers of climate change operate on multiple time 
scales. Solar variability takes place at many time scales that include 
centennial and millennial scales (Helama et al., 2010), as the radiant 
energy output of the Sun changes. Also, variations in the astronomical 
alignment of the Sun and the Earth (Milankovitch cycles) induce cycli­
cal changes in RF, but this is substantial only at millennial and longer 
time scales (see Section 5.2.1.1). Volcanic forcing is highly episodic, 
but can have dramatic, rapid impacts on climate. No major asteroid 
impacts occurred during the reference period (1750–2012) and thus 
this effect is not considered here. This section discusses solar and 
volcanic forcings, the two dominant natural contributors of climate 
change since the pre-industrial time.
8.4.1	
Solar Irradiance
In earlier IPCC reports the forcing was estimated as the instantaneous 
RF at TOA. However, due to wavelength-albedo dependence, solar radi­
ation-wavelength dependence and absorption within the stratosphere 
and the resulting stratospheric adjustment, the RF is reduced to about 
78% of the TOA instantaneous RF (Gray et al., 2009). There is low con­
fidence in the exact value of this number, which can be model and time 
scale dependent (Gregory et al., 2004; Hansen et al., 2005). AR4 gives 
an 11-year running mean instantaneous TOA RF between 1750 and 
the present of 0.12 W m–2 with a range of estimates of 0.06 to 0.30 W 
m–2, equivalent to a RF of 0.09 W m–2 with a range of 0.05 to 0.23 W 
m–2. For a consistent treatment of all forcing agents, hereafter we use 
RF while numbers quoted from AR4 will be provided both as RF and 
instantaneous RF at TOA.
8.4.1.1	 Satellite Measurements of Total Solar Irradiance
Total solar irradiance (TSI) measured by the Total Irradiance Monitor 
(TIM) on the spaceborne Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment 
(SORCE) is 1360.8 ± 0.5 W m–2 during 2008 (Kopp and Lean, 2011) 
which is ~4.5 W m–2 lower than the Physikalisch-Meteorologisches 
Observatorium Davos (PMOD) TSI composite during 2008 (Frohlich, 
2009).The difference is probably due to instrumental biases in meas­
urements prior to TIM. Measurements with the PREcision MOnitor 
Sensor (PREMOS) instrument support the TIM absolute values (Kopp 
and Lean, 2011). The TIM calibration is also better linked to national 
standards which provides further support that it is the most accurate 
(see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.6). Given the lower TIM TSI 
values relative to currently used standards, most general circulation 
models are calibrated to incorrectly high values. However, the few 
tenths of a percent bias in the absolute TSI value has minimal con­
sequences for climate simulations because the larger uncertainties in 
cloud properties have a greater effect on the radiative balance. As the 
maximum-to-minimum TSI relative change is well-constrained from 
observations, and historical variations are calculated as changes rela­
tive to modern values, a revision of the absolute value of TSI affects RF 
by the same fraction as it affects TSI. The downward revision of TIM TSI 
with respect to PMOD, being 0.3%, thus has a negligible impact on RF, 
which is given with a relative uncertainty of several tenths of a percent.
Since 1978, several independent space-based instruments have direct­
ly measured the TSI. Three main composite series were constructed, 
referred to as the Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM) 
(Willson and Mordvinov, 2003), the Royal Meteorological Institute of 
Belgium (RMIB) (Dewitte et al., 2004) and the PMOD (Frohlich, 2006) 
series. There are two major differences between ACRIM and PMOD. 
The first is the rapid drift in calibration between PMOD and ACRIM 
before 1981. This arises because both composites employ the Hickey–
Frieden (HF) radiometer data for this interval, while a re-evaluation of 
the early HF degradation has been implemented by PMOD but not by 
ACRIM. The second one, involving also RMIB, is the bridging of the gap 
between the end of ACRIM I (mid-1989) and the beginning of ACRIM 
II (late 1991) observations, as it is possible that a change in HF data 
occurred during this gap. This possibility is neglected in ACRIM and 
thus its TSI increases by more than 0.5 W m–2 during solar cycle (SC) 
22. These differences lead to different long-term TSI trends in the three 
composites (see Figure 8.10): ACRIM rises until 1996 and subsequently 
declines, RMIB has an upward trend through 2008 and PMOD shows a 
decline since 1986 which unlike the other two composites, follows the 
solar-cycle-averaged sunspot number (Lockwood, 2010). Moreover, the 
ACRIM trend implies that the TSI on time scales longer than the SC is 
positively correlated with the cosmic ray variation indicating a decline 
in TSI throughout most of the 20th century (the opposite to most TSI 
reconstructions produced to date; see Section 8.4.1.2). Furthermore, 
extrapolating the ACRIM TSI long-term drift would imply a brighter 
Sun in the Maunder minimum (MM) than now, again opposite to most 
TSI reconstructions (Lockwood and Frohlich, 2008). Finally, analysis 
of instrument degradation and pointing issues (Lee et al., 1995) and 
independent modeling based on solar magnetograms (Wenzler et al.,
=== PAGE 31 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
689
2009; Ball et al., 2012), confirm the need for correction of HF data, and 
we conclude that PMOD is more accurate than the other composites.
TSI variations of approximately 0.1% were observed between the 
maximum and minimum of the 11-year SC in the three composites 
mentioned above (Kopp and Lean, 2011). This variation is mainly due 
to an interplay between relatively dark sunspots, bright faculae and 
bright network elements (Foukal and Lean, 1988; see Section 5.2.1.2). 
A declining trend since 1986 in PMOD solar minima is evidenced in 
Figure 8.10. Considering the PMOD solar minima values of 1986 and 
2008, the RF is –0.04 W m–2. Our assessment of the uncertainty range 
of changes in TSI between 1986 and 2008 is –0.08 to 0.0 W m–2 and 
thus very likely negative, and includes the uncertainty in the PMOD 
data (Frohlich, 2009; see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.6) but 
is extended to also take into account the uncertainty of combining the 
satellite data.
For incorporation of TIM data with the previous and overlapping data, 
in Figure 8.10 we have standardized the composite time series to the 
TIM series (over 2003–2012, the procedure is explained in Supplemen­
tary Material Section 8.SM.6. Moreover as we consider annual averag­
es, ACRIM and PMOD start at 1979 because for 1978 both composites 
have only two months of data.
8.4.1.2	 Total Solar Irradiance Variations Since Preindustrial Time
The year 1750, which is used as the preindustrial reference for estimat­
ing RF, corresponds to a maximum of the 11-year SC. Trend analysis are 
usually performed over the minima of the solar cycles that are more 
stable. For such trend estimates, it is then better to use the closest 
SC minimum, which is in 1745. To avoid trends caused by compar­
ing different portions of the solar cycle, we analyze TSI changes using 
multi-year running means. For the best estimate we use a recent TSI 
reconstruction by Krivova et al. (2010) between 1745 and 1973 and 
from 1974 to 2012 by Ball et al. (2012). The reconstruction is based 
(        )
Figure 8.10 |  Annual average composites of measured total solar irradiance: The 
Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (ACRIM) (Willson and Mordvinov, 2003), 
the Physikalisch-Meteorologisches Observatorium Davos (PMOD) (Frohlich, 2006) and 
the Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (RMIB) (Dewitte et al., 2004).These com­
posites are standardized to the annual average (2003–2012) Total Irradiance Monitor 
(TIM) (Kopp and Lean, 2011) measurements that are also shown.
on physical modeling of the evolution of solar surface magnetic flux, 
and its relationship with sunspot group number (before 1974) and 
sunspot umbra and penumbra and faculae afterwards. This provides 
a more detailed reconstruction than other models (see the time series 
in Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.3). The best estimate from our 
assessment of the most reliable TSI reconstruction gives a 7-year run­
ning mean RF between the minima of 1745 and 2008 of 0.05 W m–2. 
Our assessment of the range of RF from TSI changes is 0.0 to 0.10 
W m–2 which covers several updated reconstructions using the same 
7-year running mean past-to-present minima years (Wang et al., 2005; 
Steinhilber et al., 2009; Delaygue and Bard, 2011), see Supplementa­
ry Material Table 8.SM.4. All reconstructions rely on indirect proxies 
that inherently do not give consistent results. There are relatively large 
discrepancies among the models (see Figure 8.11).With these consid­
erations, we adopt this value and range for AR5. This RF is almost half 
of that in AR4, in part because the AR4 estimate was based on the 
previous solar cycle minimum while the AR5 estimate includes the drop 
of TSI in 2008 compared to the previous two SC minima (see 8.4.1). 
Concerning the uncertainty range, in AR4 the upper limit corresponded 
to the reconstruction of Lean (2000), based on the reduced brightness 
of non-cycling Sun-like stars assumed typical of a Maunder minimum 
(MM) state. The use of such stellar analogues was based on the work 
of Baliunas and Jastrow (1990), but more recent surveys have not 
reproduced their results and suggest that the selection of the original 
set was flawed (Hall and Lockwood, 2004; Wright, 2004); the lower 
limit from 1750 to present in AR4 was due to the assumed increase 
in the amplitude of the 11-year cycle only. Thus the RF and uncertain­
ty range have been obtained in a different way in AR5 compared to 
AR4. Maxima to maxima RF give a higher estimate than minima to 
minima RF, but the latter is more relevant for changes in solar activity. 
Given the medium agreement and medium evidence, this RF value has 
a medium confidence level (although confidence is higher for the last 
three decades). Figure 8.11 shows several TSI reconstructions modelled 
using sunspot group numbers (Wang et al., 2005; Krivova et al., 2010; 
(        )
Figure 8.11 | Reconstructions of total solar irradiance since1745; annual resolution 
series from Wang et al. (2005) with and without an independent change in the back­
ground level of irradiance, Krivova et al. (2010) combined with Ball et al. (2012) and 
5-year time resolution series from Steinhilber et al. (2009) and Delaygue and Bard 
(2011). The series are standardized to the Physikalisch-Meteorologisches Observato­
rium Davos (PMOD) measurements of solar cycle 23 (1996–2008) (PMOD is already 
standardized to Total Irradiance Monitor).
=== PAGE 32 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
690
Ball et al., 2012) and sunspot umbra and penumbra and faculae (Ball 
et al., 2012), or cosmogenic isotopes (Steinhilber et al., 2009; Delaygue 
and Bard, 2011). These reconstructions are standardized to PMOD SC 
23 (1996–2008) (see also Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.6).
For the MM-to-present AR4 gives a TOA instantaneous RF range of 
0.1 to 0.28 W m–2, equivalent to 0.08 to 0.22 W m–2 with the RF defi­
nition used here. The reconstructions in Schmidt et al. (2011) indicate 
a MM-to-present RF range of 0.08 to 0.18 W  m–2, which is within 
the AR4 range although narrower. As discussed above, the estimates 
based on irradiance changes in Sun-like stars are not included in this 
range because the methodology has been shown to be flawed. A more 
detailed explanation of this is found in Supplementary Material Section 
8.SM.6. For details about TSI reconstructions on millennia time scales 
see Section 5.2.1.2.
8.4.1.3	 Attempts to Estimate Future Centennial Trends of
Total Solar Irradiance
Cosmogenic isotope and sunspot data (Rigozo et al., 2001; Solanki and 
Krivova, 2004; Abreu et al., 2008) reveal that currently the Sun is in a 
grand activity maximum that began about 1920 (20th century grand 
maximum). However, SC 23 showed an activity decline not previous­
ly seen in the satellite era (McComas et al., 2008; Smith and Balogh, 
2008; Russell et al., 2010). Most current estimations suggest that the 
forthcoming solar cycles will have lower TSI than those for the past 30 
years (Abreu et al., 2008; Lockwood et al., 2009; Rigozo et al., 2010; 
Russell et al., 2010). Also there are indications that the mean magnetic 
field in sunspots may be diminishing on decadal level. A linear expan­
sion of the current trend may indicate that of the order of half the 
sunspot activity may disappear by about 2015 (Penn and Livingston, 
2006). These studies only suggest that the Sun may have left the 20th 
century grand maximum and not that it is entering another grand min­
imum. But other works propose a grand minimum during the 21st cen­
tury, estimating an RF within a range of -0.16 to 0.12 W m–2 between 
this future minimum and the present-day TSI (Jones et al., 2012). How­
ever, much more evidence is needed and at present there is very low 
confidence concerning future solar forcing estimates.
Nevertheless, even if there is such decrease in the solar activity, there 
is a high confidence that the TSI RF variations will be much smaller 
in magnitude than the projected increased forcing due to GHG (see 
Section 12.3.1).
8.4.1.4	 Variations in Spectral Irradiance
8.4.1.4.1	
Impacts of ultraviolet variations on the stratosphere
Ozone is the main gas involved in stratospheric radiative heating. 
Ozone production rate variations are largely due to solar UV irradi­
ance changes (HAIGH, 1994), with observations showing statistical­
ly significant variations in the upper stratosphere of 2 to 4% along 
the SC (Soukharev and Hood, 2006). UV variations may also produce 
transport-induced ozone changes due to indirect effects on circulation 
(Shindell et al., 2006b). In addition, statistically significant evidence for 
an 11-year variation in stratospheric temperature and zonal winds is 
attributed to UV radiation (Frame and Gray, 2010). The direct UV heat­
ing of the background ozone is dominant and over twice as large as 
the ozone heating in the upper stratosphere and above, while indirect 
solar and terrestrial radiation through the SC-induced ozone change 
is dominant below about 5 hPa (Shibata and Kodera, 2005). The RF 
due to solar-induced ozone changes is a small fraction of the solar RF 
discussed in Section 8.4.1.1 (Gray et al., 2009).
8.4.1.4.2	
Measurements of spectral irradiance
Solar spectral irradiance (SSI) variations in the far (120 to 200 nm) 
and middle (200 to 300 nm) ultraviolet (UV) are the primary driver for 
heating, composition, and dynamic changes of the stratosphere, and 
although these wavelengths compose a small portion of the incoming 
radiation they show large relative variations between the maximum 
and minimum of the SC compared to the corresponding TSI chang­
es. As UV heating of the stratosphere over a SC has the potential to 
influence the troposphere indirectly, through dynamic coupling, and 
therefore climate (Haigh, 1996; Gray et al., 2010), the UV may have a 
more significant impact on climate than changes in TSI alone would 
suggest. Although this indicates that metrics based only on TSI are not 
appropriate, UV measurements present several controversial issues 
and modelling is not yet robust.
Multiple space-based measurements made in the past 30 years indi­
cated that UV variations account for about 30% of the SC TSI varia­
tions, while about 70% were produced within the visible and infrared 
(Rottman, 2006). However, current models and data provide the range 
of 30 to 90% for the contribution of the UV variability below 400 nm to 
TSI changes (Ermolli et al., 2013), with a more probable value of ~60% 
(Morrill et al., 2011; Ermolli et al., 2013). The Spectral Irradiance Mon­
itor (SIM) on board SORCE (Harder et al., 2009) shows, over the SC 23 
declining phase, measurements that are rather inconsistent with prior 
understanding, indicating that additional validation and uncertainty 
estimates are needed (DeLand and Cebula, 2012; Lean and Deland, 
2012). A wider exposition can be found in Supplementary Material 
Section 8.SM.6.
8.4.1.4.3	
Reconstructions of preindustrial ultraviolet variations
The Krivova et al. (2010) reconstruction is based on what is known 
about spectral contrasts of different surface magnetic features and the 
relationship between TSI and magnetic fields. The authors interpolated 
backwards to the year 1610 based on sunspot group numbers and 
magnetic information. The Lean (2000) model is based on historical 
sunspot number and area and is scaled in the UV using measurements 
from the Solar Stellar Irradiance Comparison Experiment (SOLSTICE) 
on board the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The results 
show smoothed 11-year UV SSI changes between 1750 and the pres­
ent of about 25% at about 120 nm, about 8% at 130 to 175 nm, ~4% 
at 175 to 200 nm, and about 0.5% at 200 to 350 nm. Thus, the UV SSI 
appears to have generally increased over the past four centuries, with 
larger trends at shorter wavelengths. As few reconstructions are avail­
able, and recent measurements suggest a poor understanding of UV 
variations and their relationship with solar activity, there is very low 
confidence in these values.
=== PAGE 33 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
691
8.4.1.5	 The Effects of Cosmic Rays on Clouds
Changing cloud amount or properties modify the Earth’s albedo and 
therefore affect climate. It has been hypothesized that cosmic ray flux 
create atmospheric ions which facilitates aerosol nucleation and new 
particle formation with a further impact on cloud formation (Dickinson, 
1975; Kirkby, 2007). High solar activity means a stronger heliospheric 
magnetic field and thus a more efficient screen against cosmic rays. 
Under the hypothesis underlined above, the reduced cosmic ray flux 
would promote fewer clouds amplifying the warming effect expected 
from high solar activity. There is evidence from laboratory, field and 
modelling studies that ionization from cosmic ray flux may enhance 
aerosol nucleation in the free troposphere (Merikanto et al., 2009; 
Mirme et al., 2010; Kirkby et al., 2011). However, there is high con­
fidence (medium evidence and high agreement) that the cosmic ray–
ionization mechanism is too weak to influence global concentrations 
of cloud condensation nuclei or their change over the last century or 
during a SC in a climatically significant way (Harrison and Ambaum, 
2010; Erlykin and Wolfendale, 2011; Snow-Kropla et al., 2011). A 
detailed exposition is found in Section 7.4.6.
8.4.2	
Volcanic Radiative Forcing
8.4.2.1	 Introduction
Volcanic eruptions that inject substantial amounts of SO2 gas into 
the stratosphere are the dominant natural cause of externally forced 
climate change on the annual and multi-decadal time scales, both 
because of the multi-decadal variability of eruptions and the time 
scale of the climate system response, and can explain much of the 
pre-industrial climate change of the last millennium (Schneider et 
al., 2009; Brovkin et al., 2010; Legras et al., 2010; Miller et al., 2012). 
Although volcanic eruptions inject both mineral particles (called ash 
or tephra) and sulphate aerosol precursor gases (predominantly SO2) 
into the atmosphere, it is the sulphate aerosols, which because of their 
small size are effective scatterers of sunlight and have long lifetimes, 
that are responsible for RF important for climate. Global annually aver­
aged emissions of CO2 from volcanic eruptions since 1750 have been 
at least 100 times smaller than anthropogenic emissions and incon­
sequential for climate on millennial and shorter time scales (Gerlach, 
2011). To be important for climate change, sulphur must be injected 
into the stratosphere, as the lifetime of aerosols in the troposphere is 
only about one week, whereas sulphate aerosols in the stratosphere 
from tropical eruptions have a lifetime of about one year, and those 
from high-latitude eruptions last several months. Most stratospheric 
aerosols are from explosive eruptions that directly put sulphur into the 
stratosphere, but Bourassa et al. (2012, 2013) showed that sulphur 
injected into the upper troposphere can then be lifted into the strato­
sphere over the next month or two by deep convection and large scale 
Asian summer monsoon circulation, although Vernier et al. (2013) and 
Fromm et al. (2013) suggested that direct injection was also important. 
Robock (2000), AR4 (Forster et al., 2007) and Timmreck (2012) provide 
summaries of this relatively well understood forcing agent.
There have been no major volcanic eruptions since Mt Pinatubo in 
1991 (Figure 8.12), but several smaller eruptions have caused a RF for 
the years 2008–2011 of –0.11 (–0.15 to –0.08) W m–2, approximately 
twice the magnitude of the 1999–2002 RF of –0.06 (–0.08 to –0.04) 
W m–2, consistent with the trends noted in Solomon et al. (2011). 
However, the CMIP5 simulations discussed elsewhere in this report 
did not include the recent small volcanic forcing in their calculations. 
New work has also produced a better understanding of high latitude 
eruptions, the hydrological response to volcanic eruptions (Trenberth 
and Dai, 2007; Anchukaitis et al., 2010), better long-term records of 
past volcanism and better understanding of the effects of very large 
eruptions.
There are several ways to measure both the SO2 precursor and sul­
phate aerosols in the stratosphere, using balloons, airplanes, and both 
ground- and satellite-based remote sensing. Both the infrared and 
ultraviolet signals sensed by satellite instruments can measure SO2, 
and stratospheric aerosol measurements by space-based sensors have 
been made on a continuous basis since 1978 by a number of instru­
ments employing solar and stellar occultation, limb scattering, limb 
emission, and lidar strategies (Thomason and Peter, 2006; Kravitz et al., 
2011; Solomon et al., 2011).
Forster et al. (2007) described four mechanisms by which volcanic 
forcing influences climate: RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction; 
differential (vertical or horizontal) heating, producing gradients and 
changes in circulation; interactions with other modes of circulation, 
such as El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO); and ozone depletion with 
its effects on stratospheric heating, which depends on anthropogenic 
chlorine (stratospheric ozone would increase with a volcanic eruption 
under low-chlorine conditions). In addition, the enhanced diffuse light 
from volcanic aerosol clouds impacts vegetation and hence the carbon 
cycle (Mercado et al., 2009) and aerosol–cloud interaction of sulphate 
aerosols on clouds in the troposphere can also be important (Schmidt 
et al., 2010), though Frolicher et al. (2011) showed that the impacts of 
the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption on the carbon cycle were small.
8.4.2.2	 Recent Eruptions
The background stratospheric aerosol concentration was affected by 
several small eruptions in the first decade of the 21st century (Nagai et 
al., 2010; Vernier et al., 2011; Neely et al., 2013; see also Figure 8.13), 
with a very small contribution from tropospheric pollution (Siddaway 
and Petelina, 2011; Vernier et al., 2011), and had a small impact on RF 
(Solomon et al., 2011). Two recent high-latitude eruptions, of Kasa­
tochi Volcano (52.1°N, 175.3°W) on August 8, 2008 and of Sarychev 
Volcano (48.1°N, 153.2°E) on June 12–16, 2009, each injected ~1.5 
Tg(SO2) into the stratosphere, but did not produce detectable climate 
response. Their eruptions, however, led to better understanding of the 
dependence of the amount of material and time of year of high-lat­
itude injections to produce climate impacts (Haywood et al., 2010; 
Kravitz et al., 2010, 2011). The RF from high-latitude eruptions is a 
function of seasonal distribution of insolation and the 3- to 4-month 
lifetime of high-latitude volcanic aerosols. Kravitz and Robock (2011) 
showed that high-latitude eruptions must inject at least 5 Tg(SO2) into 
the lower stratosphere in the spring or summer, and much more in fall 
or winter, to have a detectible climatic response.
On April 14, 2010 the Eyjafjallajökull volcano in Iceland (63.6°N, 
19.6°W) began an explosive eruption phase that shut down air traffic
=== PAGE 34 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
692
in Europe for 6 days and continued to disrupt it for another month. The 
climatic impact of Eyjafjallajökull was about 10,000 times less than 
that of Mt Pinatubo; however, because it emitted less than 50 ktonnes 
SO2 and its lifetime in the troposphere was 50 times less than if it had 
been injected into the stratosphere, and was therefore undetectable 
amidst the chaotic weather noise in the atmosphere (Robock, 2010). 
2011 saw the continuation of a number of small eruptions with signif­
icant tropospheric SO2 and ash injections, including Puyehue-Cordón 
Caulle in Chile, Nabro in Eritrea, and Grimsvötn in Iceland. None have 
been shown to have produced an important RF, but the June 13, 2011 
Nabro eruption resulted in the largest stratospheric aerosol cloud since 
the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption (Bourassa et al., 2012), more than 1.5 
Tg(SO2).
Figure 8.12 shows reconstructions of volcanic aerosol optical depth 
since 1750. Figure 8.13 shows details of the vertical distribution of 
stratospheric aerosols in the tropics since 1985. The numerous small 
eruptions in the past decade are evident, but some of them were at 
higher latitudes and their full extent is not captured in this plot.
Figure 8.13 |  (Top) Monthly mean extinction ratio (525 nm) profile evolution in the tropics [20°N to 20°S] from January 1985 through December 2012 derived from Stratospheric 
Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE) II extinction in 1985–2005 and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observation (CALIPSO) scattering ratio in 2006–2012, 
after removing clouds below 18 km based on their wavelength dependence (SAGE II) and depolarization properties (CALIPSO) compared to aerosols. Black contours represent the 
extinction ratio in log-scale from 0.1 to 100. The position of each volcanic eruption occurring during the period is displayed with its first two letters on the horizontal axis, where 
tropical eruptions are noted in red. The eruptions were Nevado del Ruiz (Ne), Augustine (Au), Chikurachki (Ch), Kliuchevskoi (Kl), Kelut (Ke), Pinatubo (Pi), Cerro Hudson (Ce), Spur 
(Sp), Lascar (La), Rabaul (Ra), Ulawun (Ul), Shiveluch (Sh), Ruang (Ru), Reventador (Re), Manam (Ma), Soufrière Hills (So), Tavurvur (Ta), Okmok (Ok), Kasatochi (Ka), Victoria (Vi*—
forest fires with stratospheric aerosol injection), Sarychev (Sa), Merapi (Me), Nabro (Na). (Updated from Figure 1 from Vernier et al., 2011.) (Bottom) Mean stratospheric aerosol 
optical depth (AOD) in the tropics [20°N to 20°S] between the tropopause and 40 km since 1985 from the SAGE II (black line), the Global Ozone Monitoring by Occultation of Stars 
(GOMOS) (red line), and CALIPSO (blue line). (Updated from Figure 5 from Vernier et al., 2011.)
Figure 8.12 |  Volcanic reconstructions of global mean aerosol optical depth (at 550 
nm). Gao et al. (2008) and Crowley and Unterman (2013) are from ice core data, and 
end in 2000 for Gao et al. (2008) and 1996 for Crowley and Unterman (2013). Sato et 
al. (1993) includes data from surface and satellite observations, and has been updated 
through 2011. (Updated from Schmidt et al., 2011.)
=== PAGE 35 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
693
8.4.2.3	 Records of Past Volcanism and Effects of Very
Large Eruptions
Although the effects of volcanic eruptions on climate are largest in 
the 2 years following a large stratospheric injection, and the winter 
warming effect in the NH has been supported by long-term records 
(Fischer et al., 2007), there is new work indicating extended volcanic 
impacts via long-term memory in the ocean heat content and sea level 
(Stenchikov et al., 2009; Gregory, 2010; Otterä et al., 2010). Zanchet­
tin et al. (2012) found changes in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation 
that imply strengthened northward oceanic heat transport a decade 
after major eruptions, which contributes to the emergence of extensive 
winter warming over the continental NH along with persistent cooling 
over Arctic regions on decadal time scales, in agreement with Zhong et 
al. (2011) and Miller et al. (2012).
New work on the mechanisms by which a supereruption (Self and 
Blake, 2008) could force climate has focused on the 74,000 BP eruption 
of the Toba volcano (2.5°N, 99.0°E). Robock et al. (2009) used simu­
lations of up to 900 times the 1991 Mt Pinatubo sulphate injection to 
show that the forcing is weaker than that predicted based on a linear 
relationship with the sulphate aerosol injection. The results agreed 
with a previous simulation by Jones et al. (2005). They also showed 
that chemical interactions with ozone had small impacts on the forcing 
and that the idea of Bekki et al. (1996) that water vapour would limit 
and prolong the growth of aerosols was not supported. Timmreck et al. 
(2010) however, incorporating the idea of Pinto et al. (1989) that aer­
osols would grow and therefore both have less RF per unit mass and 
fall out of the atmosphere more quickly, found much less of a radiative 
impact from such a large stratospheric input.
8.4.2.4	 Future Effects
We expect large eruptions over the next century but cannot predict 
when. Ammann and Naveau (2003) and Stothers (2007) suggested an 
80-year periodicity in past eruptions, but the data record is quite short 
and imperfect, and there is no mechanism proposed that would cause 
this. While the period 1912–1963 was unusual for the past 500 years in 
having no large volcanic eruptions, and the period 1250–1300 had the 
most globally climatically significant eruptions in the past 1500 years 
(Gao et al., 2008), current knowledge only allows us to predict such 
periods on a statistical basis, assuming that the recent past distribu­
tions are stationary. Ammann and Naveau (2003), Gusev (2008), and 
Deligne et al. (2010) studied these statistical properties and Ammann 
and Naveau (2010) showed how they could be used to produce a sta­
tistical distribution for future simulations. Although the future forcing 
from volcanic eruptions will depend only on the stratospheric aerosol 
loading for most forcing mechanisms, the future effects on reducing 
ozone will diminish as ozone depleting substances diminish in the 
future (Eyring et al., 2010b).
8.5	
Synthesis of Global Mean Radiative 
Forcing, Past and Future
The RF can be used to quantify the various agents that drive climate 
change over the Industrial Era or the various contributions to future 
climate change. There are multiple ways in which RF can be attribut­
ed to underlying causes, each providing various perspectives on the 
importance of the different factors driving climate change. This section 
evaluates the RF with respect to emitted component and with respect 
to the ultimate atmospheric concentrations. The uncertainties in the RF 
Box 8.3 |  Volcanic Eruptions as Analogues
Volcanic eruptions provide a natural experiment of a stratospheric aerosol cloud that can serve to inform us of the impacts of the pro­
posed production of such a cloud as a means to control the climate, which is one method of geoengineering (Rasch et al., 2008); see 
Section 7.7. For example, Trenberth and Dai (2007) showed that the Asian and African summer monsoon, as well as the global hydro­
logical cycle, was weaker for the year following the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption, which is consistent with climate model simulations 
(Robock et al., 2008). MacMynowski et al. (2011) showed that because the climate system response of the hydrological cycle is rapid, 
forcing from volcanic eruptions, which typically last about a year, can serve as good analogues for longer-lived forcing. The formation 
of sulphate aerosols, their transport and removal, their impacts on ozone chemistry, their RF, and the impacts on whitening skies all 
also serve as good analogues for geoengineering proposals. Volcanic impacts on the carbon cycle because of more diffuse radiation 
(Mercado et al., 2009) and on remote sensing can also be useful analogues, and the impacts of contrail-generated sub-visual cirrus 
(Long et al., 2009) can be used to test the long-term impacts of a permanent stratospheric cloud.
Smoke from fires generated by nuclear explosions on cities and industrial areas, which could be lofted into the stratosphere, would 
cause surface cooling and a reduction of stratospheric ozone (Mills et al., 2008). Volcanic eruptions that produce substantial strato­
spheric aerosol clouds also serve as an analogue that supports climate model simulations of the transport and removal of stratospheric 
aerosols, their impacts on ozone chemistry, their RF, and the climate response. The use of the current global nuclear arsenal still has 
the potential to produce nuclear winter, with continental temperatures below freezing in summer (Robock et al., 2007a; Toon et al., 
2008), and the use of only 100 nuclear weapons could produce climate change unprecedented in recorded human history (Robock et 
al., 2007b), with significant impacts on global agriculture (Özdoğan et al., 2013; Xia and Robock, 2013).
=== PAGE 36 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
694
agents vary and the confidence levels for these are presented in this 
section. Finally, this section shows historical and scenarios of future 
time evolution of RF.
8.5.1	
Summary of Radiative Forcing by Species and
Uncertainties
Table 8.5 has an overview of the RF agents considered here and each of 
them is given a confidence level for the change in RF over the Industrial 
Era to the present day. The confidence level is based on the evidence 
(robust, medium, and limited) and the agreement (high, medium, and 
low; see further description in Chapter 1). The confidence level of the 
forcing agents goes beyond the numerical values available in estimates 
and is an assessment for a particular forcing agent to have a real 
Evidence
Agreement
Confidence 
Level 
Basis for Uncertainty Estimates 
(more certain / less certain)
Change in Under­
standing Since AR4
Well-mixed 
greenhouse gases
Robust 
High
Very high
Measured trends from different observed data sets and differences
between radiative transfer models
No major change
Tropospheric 
ozone
Robust
Medium
High
Observed trends of ozone in the troposphere and model results for 
the industrial era/Differences between model estimates of RF
No major change
Stratospheric 
ozone
Robust
Medium
High
Observed trends in stratospheric and total ozone and model­
ling of ozone depletion/Differences between estimates of RF
No major change
Stratospheric 
water vapour 
from CH4
Robust
Low
Medium
Similarities in results of independent methods to estimate the
RF/Known uncertainty in RF calculations
Elevated owing to more studies
Aerosol–radiation
interactions
Robust
Medium
High
A large set of observations and converging independent estimates of
RF/Differences between model estimates of RF
Elevated owing to more robust esti­
mates from independent methods
Aerosol–cloud 
interactions 
Medium
Low
Low
Variety of different observational evidence and modelling activities/
Spread in model estimates of ERF and differences between
observations and model results 
ERF in AR5 has a similar 
confidence level to RF in AR4
Rapid adjustment 
aerosol–radiation 
interactions 
Medium 
Low
Low
Observational evidence combined with results from different types of
models/Large spread in model estimates
Elevated owing to 
increased evidence 
Total aerosol
effect
Medium
Medium
Medium
A large set of observations and model results, independent methods
to derive ERF estimates/Aerosol–cloud interaction processes 
and anthropogenic fraction of CCN still fairly uncertain
Not provided previously
Surface albedo 
(land use)
Robust
Medium
High
Estimates of deforestation for agricultural purposes and well known
physical processes/Spread in model estimates of RF
Elevated owing to the availability 
of high-quality satellite data
Surface albedo 
(BC aerosol on 
snow and ice)
Medium
Low 
Low
Observations of snow samples and the link between BC content 
in snow and albedo/Large spread in model estimates of RF
No major change
Contrails
Robust
Low
Medium
Contrails observations , large number of model estimates/Spread in 
model estimates of RF and uncertainties in contrail optical properties
Elevated owing to more studies
Contrail- induced 
cirrus
Medium
Low
Low
Observations of a few events of contrail induced cirrus/Extent of
events uncertain and large spread in estimates of ERF 
Elevated owing to additional 
studies increasing the evidence
Solar irradiance
Medium
Medium
Medium
Satellite information over recent decades and small uncertainty
in radiative transfer calculations/Large relative spread in
reconstructions based on proxy data
Elevated owing to better 
agreement of a weak RF
Volcanic aerosol
Robust
Medium
High
Observations of recent volcanic eruptions/Reconstructions of
past eruptions
Elevated owing to improved 
understanding
Table 8.5 |  Confidence level for the forcing estimate associated with each forcing agent for the 1750–2011 period. The confidence level is based on the evidence and the agree­
ment as given in the table. The basis for the confidence level and change since AR4 is provided. See Figure 1.11 for further description of the evidence, agreement and confidence 
level. The colours are adopted based on the evidence and agreement shown in Figure 1.11. Dark green is “High agreement and Robust evidence”, light green is either “High 
agreement and Medium evidence” or “Medium agreement and Robust evidence”, yellow is either “High agreement and limited evidence” or “Medium agreement and Medium 
evidence” or “Low agreement and Robust evidence”, orange is either “Medium agreement and Limited evidence” or “Low agreement and Medium evidence” and finally red is 
“Low agreement and Limited evidence”. Note, that the confidence levels given in Table 8.5 are for 2011 relative to 1750 and for some of the agents the confidence level may be 
different for certain portions of the Industrial Era.
value within the estimated range. Some of the RF agents have robust 
­evidence such as WMGHG with well documented increases based on 
high precision measurements as well as contrails as additional clouds 
which can be seen by direct observations. However, for some forcing 
agents the evidence is more limited regarding their existence such as 
aerosol influence on cloud cover. The consistency in the findings for 
a particular forcing agent determines the evaluation of the evidence. 
A combination of different methods, for example, observations and 
modeling, and thus the understanding of the processes causing the 
forcing is important for this evaluation. The agreement is a qualitative 
judgment of the difference between the various estimates for a par­
ticular RF agent. Figure 1.11 shows how the combined evidence and 
agreement results in five levels for the confidence level. 
Notes:
The confidence level for aerosol–cloud interactions includes rapid adjustments (which include what was previously denoted as cloud lifetime effect or second indirect aerosol effect). The separate 
confidence level for the rapid adjustment for aerosol–cloud interactions is very low. For aerosol–radiation interaction the table provides separate confidence levels for RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction and rapid adjustment associated with aerosol–radiation interaction.
=== PAGE 37 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
695
Evidence is robust for several of the RF agents because of long term 
observations of trends over the industrial era and well defined links 
between atmospheric or land surfaced changes and their radiative 
effects. Evidence is medium for a few agents where the anthropogenic 
changes or the link between the forcing agent and its radiative effect 
are less certain. Medium evidence can be assigned in cases where 
observations or modelling provide a diversity of information and thus 
not a consistent picture for a given forcing agent. We assess the evi­
dence to be limited only for rapid adjusment associated with aerosol–
cloud interaction where model studies in some cases indicate changes 
but direct observations of cloud alterations are scarce. High agreement 
is given only for the WMGHG where the relative uncertainties in the RF 
estimates are much smaller than for the other RF agents. Low agree­
ment can either be due to large diversity in estimates of the magnitude 
of the forcing or from the fact that the method to estimate the forcing 
has a large uncertainty. Stratospheric water vapour is an example of 
the latter with modest difference in the few available estimates but 
a known large uncertainty in the radiative transfer calculations (see 
further description in Section 8.3.1).
Figure 8.14 shows the development of the confidence level over the 
last four IPCC assessments for the various RF mechanisms. In the pre­
vious IPCC reports level of scientific understanding (LOSU) has been 
used instead of confidence level. For comparison with previous IPCC 
assessments the LOSU is converted approximately to confidence level. 
Note that LOSU and confidence level use different terms for their rank­
ings. The figure shows generally increasing confidence levels but also 
that more RF mechanisms have been included over time. The confi­
dence levels for the RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions, surface 
albedo due to land use and volcanic aerosols have been raised and 
are now at the same ranking as those for change in stratospheric and 
tropospheric ozone. This is due to an increased understanding of key 
parameteres and their uncertainties for the elevated RF agents. For 
tropospheric and stratospheric ozone changes, research has shown fur­
ther complexities with changes primarily influencing the troposphere 
or the stratosphere being linked to some extent (see Section 8.3.3). The 
rapid adjustment associated with aerosol–cloud interactions is given 
the confidence level very low and had a similar level in AR4. For rapid 
adjustment associated with aerosol–radiation interactions (previously 
denoted as semi-direct effect) the confidence level is low and is raised 
compared to AR4, as the evidence is improved and is now medium (see 
Section 7.5.2).
Table 8.6 shows the best estimate of the RF and ERF (for AR5 only) 
for the various RF agents from the various IPCC assessments. The RF 
due to WMGHG has increased by 16% and 8% since TAR and AR4, 
Figure 8.14 |  Confidence level of the forcing mechanisms in the 4 last IPCC assessments. In the previous IPCC assessments the level of scientific understanding (LOSU) has been 
adopted instead of confidence level, but for comparison with previous IPCC assessments the LOSU is converted approximately to confidence level. The thickness of the bars repre­
sents the relative magnitude of the current forcing (with a minimum value for clarity of presentation). LOSU for the RF mechanisms was not available in the first IPCC Assessment 
(Houghton et al., 1990). Rapid adjustments associated with aerosol–cloud interactions (shown as RA aero. –cloud interac.) which include what was previously referred to as the 
second indirect aerosol effect or cloud lifetime effect whereas rapid adjustments associated with aerosol–radiation interactions (shown as RA aero.-rad. interac.) were previously 
referred to as the semi-direct effect (see Figure 7.3). In AR4 the confidence level for aerosol–cloud interaction was given both for RF due to aerosol–cloud interaction and rapid 
adjustment associated with aerosol–cloud interaction. Generally the aerosol–cloud interaction is not separated into various components in AR5, hence the confidence levels for 
ERF due to aerosol–cloud interaction in AR5 and for RF due to aerosol–cloud interaction from previous IPCC reports are compared. The confidence level for the rapid adjustment 
associated with aerosol–cloud interaction is comparable for AR4 and AR5. The colours are adopted based on the evidence and agreement shown in Figure 1.11. Dark green is “High 
agreement and Robust evidence”, light green is either “High agreement and Medium evidence” or “Medium agreement and Robust evidence”, yellow is either “High agreement 
and limited evidence” or “Medium agreement and Medium evidence” or “Low agreement and Robust evidence”, orange is either “Medium agreement and Limited evidence” or 
“Low agreement and Medium evidence” and finally red is “Low agreement and Limited evidence”.
=== PAGE 38 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
696
­respectively. This is due mainly to increased concentrations (see Sec­
tion 8.3.2), whereas the other changes for the anthropogenic RF 
agents compared to AR4 are due to re-evaluations and in some cases 
from improved understanding. An increased number of studies, addi­
tional observational data and better agreement between models and 
observations can be the causes for such re-evaluations. The best esti­
mates for RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions, BC on snow and 
solar irradiance are all substantially decreased in magnitude compared 
to AR4; otherwise the modifications to the best estimates are rather 
small. For the RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction and BC on snow 
the changes in the estimates are based on additional new studies since 
AR4 (see Section 8.3.4 and Section 7.5). For the change in the estimate 
of the solar irradiance it is a combination on how the RF is calculated, 
new evidence showing some larger earlier estimates were incorrect, 
and a downward trend observed during recent years in the solar activ­
ity that has been taken into account (see Section 8.4.1). The estimate 
for ERF due to to aerosol–cloud interaction includes rapid adjustment 
but still this ERF is smaller in magnitude than the AR4 RF estimate due 
to aerosol–cloud interactions without rapid adjustments (a theoreti­
cal construct not quantified in AR5). The uncertainties for ERF due to 
CO2 increase when compared to RF (see Section 8.3.2). We assume the 
relative ERF uncertainties for CO2 apply to all WMGHG. For the short-
lived GHG we do not have sufficient information to include separate 
ERF uncertainty to each of these forcing agents (see Section 8.1.1.3). 
­However, for these forcing mechanisms the RF uncertainties are larger 
than for the WMGHG and thus it is unlikely that rapid adjustments 
change the uncertainties substantially.
Figure 8.15 shows the RF for agents listed in Table 8.6 over the 
1750–2011 period. The methods for calculation of forcing estimates 
are described in Section 8.3 and 8.4. For some of the components the 
forcing estimates are based on observed abundance whereas some 
are estimated from a combination of model simulations and observa­
tions and for others are purely model based. Solid bars are given for 
ERF, whereas RF values are given as (additional) hatched bars. Similarly 
the uncertainties are given for ERF in solid lines and dotted lines for 
RF. An important assumption is that different forcing mechanisms can 
be treated additively to calculate the total forcing (see Boucher and 
Haywood, 2001; Forster et al., 2007; Haywood and Schulz, 2007). Total 
ERF over the Industrial Era calculated from Monte Carlo simulations 
are shown in Figure 8.16, with a best estimate of 2.29 W m–2. For each 
of the forcing agents a probability density function (PDF) is generated 
based on uncertainties provided in Table 8.6. The combination of the 
individual RF agents to derive total forcing follows the same approach 
as in AR4 (Forster et al., 2007) which is based on the method in Bouch­
er and Haywood (2001). The PDF of the GHGs (sum of WMGHG, ozone 
and stratospheric water vapour) has a more narrow shape than the 
PDF for the aerosols owing to the much lower relative uncertainty. 
Global Mean Radiative Forcing (W m–2)
ERF (W m–2)
SAR
(1750–1993)
TAR
(1750–1998)
AR4
(1750–2005)
AR5
(1750–2011)
Comment
AR5
Well-mixed 
greenhouse gases 
(CO2, CH4, N2O, and 
halocarbons)
2.45 (2.08 to 2.82)
2.43 (2.19 to 2.67)
2.63 (2.37 to 2.89)
2.83 (2.54 to 3.12)
Change due to increase 
in concentrations
2.83 (2.26 to 3.40)
Tropospheric ozone
+0.40 (0.20 to 0.60)
+0.35 (0.20 to 0.50)
+0.35 (0.25 to 0.65)
+0.40 (0.20 to 0.60)
Slightly modified estimate
Stratospheric ozone
–0.1 (–0.2 to –0.05)
–0.15 (–0.25 to –0.05)
–0.05 (–0.15 to +0.05)
–0.05 (–0.15 to +0.05)
Estimate unchanged
Stratospheric water 
vapour from CH4
Not estimated
+0.01 to +0.03
+0.07 (+0.02, +0.12)
+0.07 (+0.02 to +0.12)
Estimate unchanged
Aerosol–radia­
tion interactions
Not estimated
Not estimated
–0.50 (–0.90 to –0.10)
–0.35 (–0.85 to +0.15)
Re-evaluated to be 
smaller in magnitude
–0.45 (–0.95 to +0.05)
Aerosol–cloud 
interactions
0 to –1.5
(sulphate only)
0 to –2.0
(all aerosols)
–0.70 (–1.80 to –0.30)
(all aerosols)
 Not estimated
Replaced by ERF and re-evaluated 
to be smaller in magnitude
–0.45 (–1.2 to 0.0)
Surface albedo 
(land use)
Not estimated
–0.20 (–0.40 to 0.0)
–0.20 (–0.40 to 0.0)
–0.15 (–0.25 to –0.05)
Re-evaluated to be slightly 
smaller in magnitude
Surface albedo 
(black carbon aero­
sol on snow and ice)
Not estimated
Not estimated
+0.10 (0.0 to +0.20)
+0.04 (+0.02 to +0.09)
Re-evaluated to be weaker
Contrails
Not estimated
+0.02 (+0.006 
to +0.07)
+0.01 (+0.003 
to +0.03) 
+0.01 (+0.005 
to +0.03)
No major change
Combined contrails 
and contrail-
induced cirrus
Not estimated
0 to +0.04
Not estimated
Not estimated
0.05 (0.02 to 0.15)
Total anthropogenic
Not estimated
Not estimated
1.6 (0.6 to 2.4)
Not estimated
Stronger positive due to changes 
in various forcing agents 
2.3 (1.1 to 3.3)
Solar irradiance
+0.30 (+0.10 
to +0.50)
+0.30 (+0.10 
to +0.50)
+0.12 (+0.06 
to +0.30)
+0.05 (0.0 to +0.10)
Re-evaluated to be weaker
Table 8.6 |  Summary table of RF estimates for AR5 and comparison with the three previous IPCC assessment reports. ERF values for AR5 are included. For AR5 the values are given 
for the period 1750–2011, whereas earlier final years have been adopted in the previous IPCC assessment reports.
Notes:
Volcanic RF is not added to the table due to the periodic nature of volcanic eruptions, which makes it difficult to compare to the other forcing mechanisms.
=== PAGE 39 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
697
Natural
Anthropogenic
Well Mixed
Greenhouse Gases
Forcing agent
Radiative forcing of climate between 1750 and 2011
-1
0
1
2
3
Radiative Forcing (W m-2)
CO2
Other WMGHG
 CH4
N2O
 Halocarbons
  Tropospheric
Stratospheric  
Ozone
Stratospheric water
vapour from CH4  
Land Use 
 Black carbon 
     on snow 
Surface Albedo
Contrail induced cirrus 
Contrails
Aerosol-Radiation Interac.
Aerosol-Cloud Interac.
Total anthropogenic
Solar irradiance
Figure 8.15 |  Bar chart for RF (hatched) and ERF (solid) for the period 1750–2011, where the total ERF is derived from Figure 8.16. Uncertainties (5 to 95% confidence range) 
are given for RF (dotted lines) and ERF (solid lines).
Figure 8.16 |  Probability density function (PDF) of ERF due to total GHG, aerosol 
forcing and total anthropogenic forcing. The GHG consists of WMGHG, ozone and 
stratospheric water vapour. The PDFs are generated based on uncertainties provided in 
Table 8.6. The combination of the individual RF agents to derive total forcing over the 
Industrial Era are done by Monte Carlo simulations and based on the method in Boucher 
and Haywood (2001). PDF of the ERF from surface albedo changes and combined con­
trails and contrail-induced cirrus are included in the total anthropogenic forcing, but 
not shown as a separate PDF. We currently do not have ERF estimates for some forcing 
mechanisms: ozone, land use, solar, etc. For these forcings we assume that the RF is 
representative of the ERF and for the ERF uncertainty an additional uncertainty of 17% 
has been included in quadrature to the RF uncertainty. See Supplementary Material Sec­
tion 8.SM.7 and Table 8.SM.4 for further description on method and values used in the 
calculations. Lines at the top of the figure compare the best estimates and uncertainty 
ranges (5 to 95% confidence range) with RF estimates from AR4.
Therefore, the large uncertainty in the aerosol forcing is the main 
cause of the large uncertainty in the total anthropogenic ERF. The total 
anthropogenic forcing is virtually certain to be positive with the prob­
ability for a negative value less than 0.1%. Compared to AR4 the total 
anthropogenic ERF is more strongly positive with an increase of 43%. 
This is caused by a combination of growth in GHG concentration, and 
thus strengthening in forcing of WMGHG, and weaker ERF estimates of 
aerosols (aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions) as a result 
of new assessments of these effects.
Figure 8.17 shows the forcing over the Industrial Era by emitted com­
pounds (see Supplementary Material Tables 8.SM.6 and 8.SM.7 for 
actual numbers and references). It is more complex to view the RF 
by emitted species than by change in atmospheric abundance (Figure 
8.15) since the number of emitted compounds and changes leading to 
RF is larger than the number of compounds causing RF directly (see 
Section 8.3.3). The main reason for this is the indirect effect of sever­
al compounds and in particular components involved in atmospheric 
chemistry (see Section 8.2). To estimate the RF by the emitted com­
pounds in some cases the emission over the entire Industrial Era is 
needed (e.g., for CO2) whereas for other compounds (such as ozone 
and CH4) quite complex simulations are required (see Section 8.3.3). 
CO2 is the dominant positive forcing both by abundance and by emit­
ted compound. Emissions of CH4, CO, and NMVOC all lead to excess 
CO2 as one end product if the carbon is of fossil origin and is the reason 
why the RF of direct CO2 emissions is slightly lower than the RF of 
abundance change of CO2. For CH4 the contribution from emission is 
estimated to be almost twice as large as that from the CH4 concen­
Greenhouse
gases
Total
anthropogenic
Aerosols
AR4 RF
-2
0
2
4
Effective radiative forcing (Wm-2)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Probability density function
=== PAGE 40 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
698
tration change, 0.97 (0.80 to 1.14) W m–2 versus 0.48 (0.43 to 0.53) 
W m–2, respectively. This is because emission of CH4 leads to ozone 
production, stratospheric water vapour, CO2 (as mentioned above), and 
importantly affects its own lifetime (Section 8.2). Actually, emissions of 
CH4 would lead to a stronger RF via the direct CH4 greenhouse effect 
(0.64 W m–2) than the RF from abundance change of CH4 (0.48 W m–2). 
This is because other compounds have influenced the lifetime of CH4 
and reduced the abundance of CH4, most notably NOx. Emissions of CO 
(0.23 (0.18 to 0.29) W m–2) and NMVOC (0.10 (0.06 to 0.14) W m–2) 
have only indirect effects on RF through ozone production, CH4 and 
CO2 and thus contribute an overall positive RF. Emissions of NOX, on 
the other hand, have indirect effects that lead to positive RF through 
ozone production and also effects that lead to negative RF through 
reduction of CH4 lifetime and thus its ­concentration, and through con­
tributions to nitrate aerosol formation. The best estimate of the overall 
effect of anthropogenic emissions of NOX is a negative RF (-0.15 (-0.34 
to +0.02) W m–2). Emissions of ammonia also contribute to nitrate aer­
osol formation, with a small offset due to compensating changes in 
sulphate aerosols. Additionally indirect effects from sulphate on atmos­
pheric compounds are not included here as models typically simulate 
a small effect, but there are large relative differences in the response 
between models. Impacts of emissions other than CO2 on the carbon 
cycle via changes in atmospheric composition (ozone or aerosols) are 
also not shown owing to the limited amount of available information.
For the WMGHG, the ERF best estimate is the same as the RF.  The 
uncertainty range is slightly larger, however.  The total emission-based 
ERF of WMGHG is 3.00 (2.22 to 3.78) W m–2.  That of CO2 is 1.68 (1.33 
to 2.03) W m–2; that of CH4 is 0.97 (0.74 to 1.20) W m–2; that of strat­
ospheric ozone-depleting halocarbons is 0.18 (0.01 to 0.35) W m–2.
Emissions of BC have a positive RF through aerosol–radiation interac­
tions and BC on snow (0.64 W m–2, see Section 8.3.4 and Section 7.5). 
The emissions from the various compounds are co-emitted; this is in 
particular the case for BC and OC from biomass burning aerosols. The 
net RF of biomass burning emissions for aerosol–radiation interactions 
is close to zero, but with rather strong positive RF from BC and negative 
RF from OC (see Sections 8.3.4 and 7.5). The ERF due to aerosol–cloud 
interactions is caused by primary anthropogenic emissions of BC, OC 
and dust as well as secondary aerosol from anthropogenic emissions 
of SO2, NOX and NH3. However, quantification of the contribution from 
the various components to the ERF due to aerosol–cloud interactions 
has not been attempted in this assessment.
8.5.2	
Time Evolution of Historical Forcing
The time evolution of global mean forcing is shown in Figure 8.18 for 
the Industrial Era. Over all time periods during the Industrial Era CO2 
and other WMGHG have been the dominant term, except for short­
er periods with strong volcanic eruptions. The time evolution shows 
an almost continuous increase in the magnitude of anthropogenic 
ERF. This is the case both for CO2 and other WMGHGs as well as sev­
eral individual aerosol components. The forcing from CO2 and other 
WMGHGs has increased somewhat faster since the 1960s. Emissions 
of CO2 have made the largest contribution to the increased anthropo­
genic forcing in every decade since the 1960s. The total aerosol ERF 
(aerosol–radiation interaction and aerosol–cloud interaction) has the 
strongest negative forcing (except for brief periods with large volcanic 
forcing), with a strengthening in the magnitude similar to many of the 
other anthropogenic forcing mechanisms with time. The global mean 
forcing of aerosol–radiation interactions was rather weak until 1950 
but strengthened in the latter half of the last century and in particular 
in the period between 1950 and 1980. The RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction by aerosol component is shown in Section 8.3.4 (Figure 8.8).
Although there is high confidence for a substantial enhancement in the 
negative aerosol forcing in the period 1950–1980, there is much more 
uncertainty in the relative change in global mean aerosol forcing over 
the last two decades (1990–2010). Over the last two decades there 
has been a strong geographic shift in aerosol and aerosol precursor 
Figure 8.17 | RF bar chart for the period 1750–2011 based on emitted compounds 
(gases, aerosols or aerosol precursors) or other changes. Numerical values and their 
uncertainties are shown in Supplementary Material Tables 8.SM.6 and 8.SM.7. Note 
that a certain part of CH4 attribution is not straightforward and discussed further in 
Section 8.3.3. Red (positive RF) and blue (negative forcing) are used for emitted com­
ponents which affect few forcing agents, whereas for emitted components affecting 
many compounds several colours are used as indicated in the inset at the upper part 
the figure. The vertical bars indicate the relative uncertainty of the RF induced by each 
component. Their length is proportional to the thickness of the bar, that is, the full length 
is equal to the bar thickness for a ±50% uncertainty. The net impact of the individual 
contributions is shown by a diamond symbol and its uncertainty (5 to 95% confidence 
range) is given by the horizontal error bar. ERFaci is ERF due to aerosol–cloud interac­
tion. BC and OC are co-emitted, especially for biomass burning emissions (given as 
Biomass Burning in the figure) and to a large extent also for fossil and biofuel emissions 
(given as Fossil and Biofuel in the figure where biofuel refers to solid biomass fuels). 
SOA have not been included because the formation depends on a variety of factors not 
currently sufficiently quantified.
(             )
=== PAGE 41 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
699
­emissions (see Section 2.2.3), and there are some uncertainties in these 
emissions (Granier et al., 2011). In addition to the regional changes in 
the aerosol forcing there is also likely a competition between various 
aerosol effects. Emission data indicate a small increase in the BC emis­
sions (Granier et al., 2011) but model studies also indicate a weak 
enhancement of other aerosol types. Therefore, the net aerosol forc­
ing depends on the balance between absorbing and scattering aero­
sols for aerosol–radiation interaction as well as balance between the 
changes in aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions. In the 
ACCMIP models, for example, the RF due to aerosol–radiation inter­
action becomes less negative during 1980 to 2000, but total aerosol 
ERF becomes more negative (Shindell et al., 2013c). There is a very low 
confidence for the trend in the total aerosol forcing during the past two 
to three decades, even the sign; however, there is high confidence that 
the offset from aerosol forcing to WMGHG forcing during this period 
was much smaller than over the 1950–1980 period.
The volcanic RF has a very irregular temporal pattern and for certain 
years has a strongly negative RF. There has not been a major volcanic 
eruption in the past decade, but some weaker eruptions give a current 
RF that is slightly negative relative to 1750 and slightly stronger in 
magnitude compared to 1999–2002 (see Section 8.4.2).
Figure 8.19 shows linear trends in forcing (anthropogenic, natural and 
total) over four different time periods. Three of the periods are the 
same as chosen in Box 9.2 (1984–1998, 1998–2011 and 1951–2011) 
and the period 1970–2011 is shown in Box 13.1. Monte Carlo sim­
ulations are performed to derive uncertainties in the forcing based 
on ranges given in Table 8.6 and the derived linear trends. Further, 
these uncertainties are combined with uncertainties derived from 
shifting time periods ±2 years and the full 90% confidence range is 
shown in Figure 8.19 (in Box 9.2 only the total forcing is shown with 
uncertainties derived from the forcing uncertainty without sensitivity 
to time period). For the anthropogenic forcing sensitivity to the selec­
tion of time periods is very small with a maximum contribution to the 
uncertainties shown in Figure 8.19 of 2%. However, for the natural 
forcing the sensitivity to time periods is the dominant contributor to 
the overall uncertainty (see Supplementary Material Figure 8.SM.3) for 
the relatively short periods 1998–2011 and 1984–1998, whereas this 
is not the case for the longer periods. For the 1998–2011 period the 
natural forcing is very likely negative and has offset 2 to 89% of the 
anthropogenic forcing. It is likely that the natural forcing change has 
offset at least 30% of the anthropogenic forcing increase and very 
likely that it has offset at least 10% of the anthropogenic increase. For 
the 1998–2011 period both the volcanic and solar forcings contribute 
to this negative natural forcing, with the latter dominating. For the 
other periods shown in Figure 8.19 the best estimate of the natural is 
much smaller in magnitude than the anthropogenic forcing, but note 
that the natural forcing is very dependent on the selection of time 
period near the 1984–1998 interval. Over the period 1951–2011 the 
trend in anthropogenic forcing is almost 0.3 W m–2 per decade and 
thus anthropogenic forcing over this period is more than 1.5 W m–2. The 
anthropogenic forcing for 1998–2011 is 30% higher and with smaller 
uncertainty than for the 1951–2011 period. Note that due to large 
WMGHG forcing (Section 8.3.2) the anthropogenic forcing was similar 
in the late 1970s and early 1980s to the 1998–2011 period. The reason 
for the reduced uncertainty in the 1998–2011 anthropogenic forcing 
is the larger domination of WMGHG forcing and smaller contribution 
from aerosol forcing compared to previous periods. Similar to the 
results for 1970–2011 in Figure 8.19, Box 13.1 shows that the global 
energy budget is dominated by anthropogenic forcing compared to 
the natural forcing, except for the two major volcanic eruption in this 
period as can be easily seen in Figure 8.18.
Figure 8.20 shows the forcing between 1980 and 2011. Compared 
to the whole Industrial Era the dominance of the CO2 is larger for 
this recent period both with respect to other WMGHG and the total 
­anthropogenic RF. The forcing due to aerosols is rather weak leading 
(                              )
(        )
Figure 8.18 |  Time evolution of forcing for anthropogenic and natural forcing mecha­
nisms. Bars with the forcing and uncertainty ranges (5 to 95% confidence range) at 
present are given in the right part of the figure. For aerosol the ERF due to aerosol–
radiation interaction and total aerosol ERF are shown. The uncertainty ranges are for 
present (2011 versus 1750) and are given in Table 8.6. For aerosols, only the uncertainty 
in the total aerosol ERF is given. For several of the forcing agents the relative uncertainty 
may be larger for certain time periods compared to present. See Supplementary Material 
Table 8.SM.8 for further information on the forcing time evolutions. Forcing numbers 
provided in Annex II. The total antropogenic forcing was 0.57 (0.29 to 0.85) W m–2 
in 1950, 1.25 (0.64 to 1.86) W m–2 in 1980 and 2.29 (1.13 to 3.33) W m–2 in 2011.
Figure 8.19 |  Linear trend in anthropogenic, natural and total forcing for the indicated 
time periods. The uncertainty ranges (5 to 95% confidence range) are combined from 
uncertainties in the forcing values (from Table 8.6) and the uncertainties in selection 
of time period. Monte Carlo simulations were performed to derive uncertainties in the 
forcing based on ranges given in Table 8.6 and linear trends in forcing. The sensitivity to 
time periods has been derived from changing the time periods by ±2 years.
=== PAGE 42 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
700
Figure 8.20 |  Bar chart for RF (hatched) and ERF (solid) for the period 1980–2011, 
where the total anthropogenic ERF are derived from Monte-Carlo simulations similar to 
Figure 8.16. Uncertainties (5 to 95% confidence range) are given for RF (dotted lines) 
and ERF (solid lines).
to a very strong net positive ERF for the 1980–2011 period. More than 
40% of the total anthropogenic ERF has occurred over the 1980–2011 
period with a value close to 1.0 (0.7 to 1.3) W m–2. The major contri­
bution to the uncertainties in the time evolution of the anthropogenic 
forcing is associated with the aerosols (see Section 8.5.1). Despite this, 
anthropogenic ERF is very likely considerably more positive than the 
natural RF over the decadal time periods since 1950. This is in par­
ticular the case after 1980, where satellite data are available that pro­
vide important measurements to constrain the natural RF mechanisms 
(e.g., the volcanic RF change between 2007–2011 and 1978–1982 is 
0.06 W m–2 and the representative change in solar irradiance over the 
1980–2011 period is –0.06 W m–2) with total natural RF of 0.0 (-0.1 to 
+0.1) W m–2.
8.5.3	
Future Radiative Forcing
Projections of global mean RF are assessed based on results from mul­
tiple sources examining the RF due to RCP emissions: the ACCMIP ini­
tiative (see Section 8.2) provides analysis of the RF or ERF due to aer­
osols and ozone (Shindell et al., 2013c), while WMGHG, land use and 
stratospheric water RFs are taken from the results of calculations with 
the reduced-complexity Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-gas 
Induced Climate Change 6 (MAGICC6) driven by the RCP emissions 
and land use (Meinshausen et al., 2011a). While MAGICC6 also esti­
mated ozone and aerosol RF, those values differ substantially from the 
ACCMIP values and are considered less realistic. Additional discussion 
of biases in the MAGICC6 results due to the simplified representations 
Natural
Anthropogenic
Well Mixed
Greenhouse Gases
Forcing agent
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Radiative Forcing (W m-2)
Radiative forcing of climate between 1980 and 2011
CO2
Other WMGHG
 CH4
N2O
 Halocarbons
  Tropospheric
Stratospheric  
Ozone
Stratospheric water
vapour from CH4  
 BC on snow
 + Land Use
Surface Albedo
Contrail induced cirrus 
Contrails
Aero.-Rad. Interac.
Aero.-Cloud Interac.
Total anthropogenic
Solar irradiance
of atmospheric chemistry and the carbon cycle, along with further dis­
cussion on the representativeness of the RCP projections in context 
with the broader set of scenarios in the literature, is presented in Sec­
tion 11.3.5 and Section 12.3 (also see Section 8.2). As the ACCMIP 
project provided projected forcings primarily at 2030 and 2100, we 
hereafter highlight those times. Although understanding the relative 
contributions of various processes to the overall effect of aerosols on 
forcing is useful, we emphasize the total aerosol ERF, which includes 
all aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions, as this is the 
most indicative of the aerosol forcing driving climate change. We also 
present traditional RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction (previously 
called direct aerosol effect) but do not examine further the various 
components of aerosol ERF. Aerosol forcing estimates, both mean and 
uncertainty ranges, are derived from the 10 ACCMIP models, 8 of which 
are also CMIP5 models. We analyze forcing during the 21st century 
(relative to 2000), and hence the WMGHG forcing changes are in addi­
tion to persistent forcing from historical WMGHG increases.
Analysis of forcing at 2030 relative to 2000 shows that under RCP2.6, 
total ozone (tropospheric and stratospheric) forcing is near zero, RF 
due to aerosol–radiation interaction is positive but small, and hence 
WMGHG forcing dominates changes over this time period (Figure 8.21). 
WMGHG forcing is dominated by increasing CO2, as declining CH4 and 
increasing N2O have nearly offsetting small contributions to forcing. 
Aerosol ERF was not evaluated for this RCP under ACCMIP, and values 
cannot be readily inferred from RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction 
as these are not directly proportional. Under RCP8.5, RF due to aerosol–
radiation interaction in 2030 is weakly negative, aerosol ERF is positive 
with a fairly small value and large uncertainty range, total ozone forc­
ing is positive but small (~0.1 W m–2), and thus WMGHG forcing again 
dominates with a value exceeding 1 W m–2. As with RCP2.6, WMGHG 
forcing is dominated by CO2, but under this scenario the other WMGHGs 
all contribute additional positive forcing. Going to 2100, ozone forcing 
diverges in sign between the two scenarios, consistent with changes in 
the tropospheric ozone burden (Figure 8.4) which are largely attribut­
able to projected CH4 emissions, but is small in either case. Ozone RF 
is the net impact of a positive forcing from stratospheric ozone recov­
ery owing to reductions in anthropogenic ozone-depleting halocarbon 
emissions in both scenarios and a larger impact from changes in tropo­
spheric precursors (Shindell et al., 2013c) which have a negative forcing 
in RCP2.6 and a positive forcing in RCP8.5.
The two scenarios are fairly consistent in their trends in RF due to aero­
sol–radiation interaction by component (Figure 8.21). There is positive 
RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction due to reductions in sulfate 
aerosol. This is largely offset by negative RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction by primary carbonaceous aerosols and especially by nitrate 
(though nearly all CMIP5 models did not include nitrate), leaving net 
aerosol RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction values that are very 
small, 0.1 W m–2 or less in magnitude, in either scenario at 2030 and 
2100. Nitrate aerosols continue to increase through 2100 as ammo­
nia emissions rise steadily due to increased use of agricultural ferti­
lizer even as all other aerosol precursor emissions decrease (Figure 
8.2), including sulphur dioxide which drives the reduction in sulphate 
­aerosol that also contributes to additional formation of nitrate aerosols 
in the future (Bauer et al., 2007; Bellouin et al., 2011). Aerosol ERF is 
likely similar at this time in all scenarios given that they all have greatly
=== PAGE 43 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
701
reduced emissions of all aerosols and aerosol precursors other than 
ammonia. Aerosol ERF shows a large positive value at 2100 relative 
to 2000, nearly returning to its 1850 levels (the 2100 versus 1850 ERF 
represents a decrease in ERF of 91% relative to the 2000 versus 1850 
value), as is expected given the RCP emissions. Thus although some 
models project large increases in nitrate RF in the future, the reduc­
tion in overall aerosol loading appears to lead to such a strong reduc­
tion in aerosol ERF that the impact of aerosols becomes very small 
under these RCPs. Of course the projections of drastic reductions in 
primary aerosol as well as aerosol and ozone precursor emissions may 
be overly optimistic as they assume virtually all nations in the world 
become wealthy and that emissions reductions are directly dependent 
on wealth. The RCPs also contain substantially lower projected growth 
in HFC emissions than in some studies (e.g., Velders et al., 2009).
Although aerosol ERF becomes less negative by nearly 1 W m–2 from 
2000 to 2100, this change is still small compared with the increased 
WMGHG forcing under RCP8.5, which is roughly 6 W m–2 during this 
time (Figure 8.21). Roughly 5 W m–2 of this WMGHG forcing comes 
from CO2, with substantial additional forcing from increases in both 
CH4 and nitrous oxide and only a very small negative forcing from 
reductions in halocarbons. Under RCP2.6, the WMGHG forcing is 
only about 0.5 W m–2 during this time, as relatively strong decreases 
in CH4 and halocarbon forcing offset roughly 40% of the increased 
CO2 forcing, which is itself far less than under RCP8.5. Hence under 
this scenario, the projected future forcing due to aerosol reductions is 
actually stronger than the WMGHG forcing. Viewing the timeseries of 
the various forcings, however, indicates that aerosol ERF is returning 
to its pre-industrial levels, so that net forcing becomes increasingly 
dominated by WMGHGs regardless of scenario during the 21st cen­
tury (Figure 8.22). As the forcing is so heavily dominated by WMGHGs 
at 2100, and the WMGHG concentrations (CO2) or emissions (others) 
were chosen to match forcing targets, all the scenarios show net forc­
ing values at that time that are fairly close to the scenarios’ target 
values. The reduced aerosol forcing, with its large uncertainty, leads 
to a pronounced decrease in the uncertainty of the total net forcing 
by 2100. Based on the spread across ACCMIP models (using ERF for 
aerosols and converting to ERF for GHGs), the 90% confidence interval 
(CI) is about 20% for the 2100 net forcing, versus 26% for 2030 under 
RCP8.5 and 45–61% for 1980 and 2000 (Shindell et al., 2013c). The 
total ERF due to all causes has been independently estimated based 
on the transient response in the CMIP5 models and a linear forc­
ing-response relationship derived through regression of the modelled 
response to an instantaneous increase in CO2 (Forster et al., 2013). 
Uncertainties based on model spread behave similarly, with the 90% 
CI for net total ERF decreasing from 53% for 2003 to only 24 to 34% 
for 2100. Forcing relative to 2000 due to land use (via albedo only) and 
stratospheric water vapor changes are not shown separately as their 
projected values under the four RCPs are quite small: –0.09 to 0.00 and 
–0.03 to 0.10 W m–2, respectively.
The CMIP5 forcing estimates (Forster et al., 2013) for the total project­
ed 2030 and 2100 ERF are slightly smaller than the results obtained 
from the ACCMIP models (or the RCP targets; see Section 12.3.3). 
Examining the subset of models included in both this regression anal­
ysis and in ACCMIP shows that the ACCMIP subset show forcings on 
the low side of the mean value obtained from the full set of CMIP5 
analyzed, indicating that the discrepancy between the methods is not 
related to analysis of a different set of models. Instead, it may reflect 
nonlinearities in the response to forcing that are not represented by 
the regression analysis of the response to abrupt CO2 increase experi­
ments (Long and Collins, 2013) or differences in the response to other 
forcing agents relative to the response to CO2 used in deriving the 
CMIP5 estimates (see also 12.3.3).
Natural forcings will also change in the future. The magnitudes cannot 
be reliably projected, but are likely to be small at multi-decadal scales 
(see Section 8.4). Brief episodic volcanic forcing could be large, ­however.
0
2
4
6
8
Effective radiative forcing (W m-2)
CO2
Other WMGHG
O3+Strat H2O
Total RFari
Aerosol ERF
Total
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Sulphate Carbonaceous
Nitrate
SOA
RCP2.6
RCP8.5
RCP2.6
RCP8.5
}
}
2030 vs 2000
2100 vs 2000
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
0
2
4
6
8
Effective radiative forcing (W m-2)
Ozone
Aerosol
WMGHG
Net
RCP8.5
RCP2.6
RCP4.5
RCP6.0
Figure 8.21 |  Radiative forcing relative to 2000 due to anthropogenic composition 
changes based on ACCMIP models for aerosols (with aerosol ERF scaled to match 
the best estimate of present-day forcing) and total ozone and RCP WMGHG forcings. 
Ranges are one standard deviation in the ACCMIP models and assessed relative uncer­
tainty for WMGHGs and stratospheric water vapor. Carbonaceous aerosols refer to pri­
mary carbonaceous, while SOA are secondary organic aerosols. Note that 2030 ERF for 
RCP2.6 was not available, and hence the total shown for that scenario is not perfectly 
comparable to the other total values. RFari is RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction.
Figure 8.22 |  Global mean anthropogenic forcing with symbols indicating the times at 
which ACCMIP simulations were performed (solid lines with circles are net; long dashes 
with squares are ozone; short dashes with diamonds are aerosol; dash-dot are WMGHG; 
colours indicate the RCPs with red for RCP8.5, orange RCP6.0, light blue RCP4.5, and 
dark blue RCP2.6). RCPs 2.6, 4.5 and 6.0 net forcings at 2100 are approximate values 
using aerosol ERF projected for RCP8.5 (modified from Shindell et al., 2013c). Some 
individual components are omitted for some RCPs for visual clarity.
=== PAGE 44 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
702
8.6	
Geographic Distribution of Radiative
Forcing
The forcing spatial pattern of the various RF mechanisms varies sub­
stantially in space and in time, especially for the NTCFs. The spatial pat­
tern is of interest to the extent that it may influence climate response 
(Section 8.6.2.2) as is being particularly investigated in the ACCMIP 
simulations.
8.6.1	
Spatial Distribution of Current Radiative Forcing
The WMGHGs such as CO2 have the largest forcing in the subtropics, 
decreasing toward the poles, with the largest forcing in warm and dry 
regions and smaller values in moist regions and in high-altitude regions 
(Taylor et al., 2011). For the NTCFs (Box 8.2) their concentration spatial 
pattern and therefore their RF pattern are highly inhomogeneous, and 
again meteorological factors such as temperature, humidity, clouds, 
and surface albedo influence how concentration translates to RF.
Figure 8.23 shows the RF spatial distribution of the major NTCFs togeth­
er with standard deviation among the ACCMIP models (Shindell et al., 
2013c) the net anthropogenic composition (WMGHG+ozone+aerosol) 
forcing is also shown (lower left panel). These models used unified 
anthropogenic emissions of aerosol and ozone precursors (Supplemen­
tary Material Figure 8.SM.2), so that the model diversity in RF is due 
only to differences in model chemical and climate features and natu­
ral emissions, and would be larger if uncertainty in the anthropogenic 
emissions were also included. In general, the confidence in geograph­
ical distribution is lower than for global mean, due to uncertainties in 
chemistry, transport and removal of species.
The negative RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction (first row; defined 
in Figure 7.3) is greatest in the NH and near populated and biomass 
burning regions. The standard deviation for the net RF due to aerosol–
radiation interaction is typically largest over regions where vegetation 
changes are largest (e.g., South Asia and central Africa), due to uncer­
tainties in biomass burning aerosol optical properties and in treatment 
of secondary organic aerosols. Carbonaceous aerosol forcing (second 
row) is greatest in South and East Asia and can be negative in biomass 
burning regions due to large weakly absorbing organic components. 
Absorbing aerosols also have enhanced positive forcing when they 
overlie high albedo surfaces such as cryosphere, desert or clouds, with 
as much as 50% of BC RF resulting from BC above clouds (Zarzycki 
and Bond, 2010).
Figure 8.24 compares the aerosol RFs for ACCMIP (Shindell et al., 
2013c), which are representative of the CMIP5 experiments, with those 
from the AeroCom model intercomparison (Myhre et al., 2013) which 
includes sixteen models that used unified meteorology and are more 
extensively compared to measurements (e.g., Koch et al., 2009b; Koffi 
et al., 2012). The forcing results are very similar, establishing the repre­
sentativeness and validity of the ACCMIP aerosol simulations.
The net aerosol ERF (Figure 8.23; third row), includes both aerosol–
radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions. The spatial pattern corre­
lates with the RF (first row), except with stronger effect in the out­
flow regions over oceans. The flux change is larger in the NH than the 
SH (e.g., by nearly a factor of 3; Ming et al., 2007). Rapid adjustment 
associated with aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions may 
enhance or reduce cloud cover depending on the region, cloud dynam­
ics and aerosol loading (e.g., Randles and Ramaswamy, 2008; Koch 
and Del Genio, 2010; Persad et al., 2012). In general, the ocean-land 
forcing pattern differs from that reported in AR4, where the forcing due 
to aerosol–cloud interaction were larger over land than ocean (Forster 
et al., 2007), and this continues to be a source of uncertainty. Since 
AR4, Quaas et al. (2009) showed using satellite retrievals that the cor­
relation between AOD changes and droplet number changes is strong­
er over oceans than over land and that models tend to overestimate 
the strength of the relation over land. Penner et al. (2011) showed 
that satellite retrievals, due to their dependence on present-day condi­
tions, may underestimate the forcing due to aerosol–cloud interaction, 
especially over land, although this model analysis may overestimate 
the cloud condensation nucleus to AOD relation (Quaas et al., 2011). 
Wang and Penner (2009) also showed that if models include boundary 
layer nucleation and increase the fraction of sulphur emitted as a pri­
mary particle, the effect over land is increased relative to over ocean 
(see also Section 7.5.3). The aerosol ERF standard deviation is large 
in biomass burning regions, as for the RF, and in regions where cloud 
effects differ among models (e.g., northern North America, northeast 
Asia, Amazonia). The spread in aerosol ERF is much larger than for the 
RF alone, although the relative standard deviation is no larger (Shindell 
et al., 2013c).
For components that primarily scatter radiation, the radiative effect at 
the surface is similar to the RF (according to the definition in Section 
8.1.1). However for components that absorb radiation in the atmos­
phere the radiation reaching the surface is reduced (Forster et al., 2007; 
Ramanathan and Carmichael, 2008; Andrews et al., 2010). This absorp­
tion of incoming solar radiation alters the vertical temperature profile 
in the atmospheric column and can thus change atmospheric circula­
tion and cloud formation. The aerosol atmospheric absorption (Figure 
8.23, bottom right), or the difference between ERF and the analogous 
radiative flux reaching the surface including rapid adjustments, has a 
spatial pattern that to lowest order tracks the carbonaceous aerosol 
forcing, but is also affected by cloud changes, where e.g., cloud loss 
could enhance atmospheric absorption. Atmospheric aerosol absorp­
tion patterns thus mirror the ERF due to aerosol–cloud interaction pat­
tern, with larger forcing over continents.
Ozone RF is calculated using the methodology described in Shindell et 
al. (2013c), but applied to the larger set of models in ACCMIP (Steven­
son et al., 2013). The net ozone RF (Figure 8.23; fourth row) is largest 
in subtropical latitudes, and is more positive in the NH than the SH. 
Pollution in the NH accounts for positive tropospheric forcing; strato­
spheric ozone loss has caused negative SH polar forcing. Model stand­
ard deviation is largest in the polar regions where lower stratosphere/
upper troposphere changes differ in the models (Young et al., 2013).
Overall, the confidence in aerosol and ozone RF spatial patterns is 
medium and lower than that for the global mean due to the large 
regional standard deviations (Figure 8.23), and is exacerbated in aero­
sol ERF patterns due to uncertainty in cloud responses.
=== PAGE 45 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
703
All aerosol RF
 0.29 W m-2
Ozone RF
Carbonaceous aerosol RF
0.21 W m-2
0.08 (0.18) W m-2
 0.16 (0.19) W m-2
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
.70
.35
0
1.05
2.10
1.75
1.40
2.45
.70
.35
0
1.05
2.10
1.75
1.40
2.45
.12
.06
0
.18
.36
.30
.24
.42
-0.26 W m-2
 0.14 (0.30) W m-2
All aerosol ERF
-1.5
-2.5
-3.5
-.5
1.25
.75
.25
1.75
.70
.35
0
1.05
2.10
1.75
1.40
2.45
 0.29 (1.27) W m-2
 -1.17 W m-2
All aerosol eﬀective
atmospheric forcing
 1.42 W m-2
-1.5
-2.5
-3.5
-.5
2.5
1.5
.5
3.5
 1.46 W m-2
-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
-0.5
2.0
1.0
0.5
3.0
Total anthropogenic
composition forcing
Preindustrial to Present-Day Forcing
Multi-model mean
Standard deviation
Multi-model mean
Multi-model mean
Figure 8.23 |  Spatial pattern of ACCMIP models 1850 to 2000 forcings, mean values (left) and standard deviation (right) for aerosols and ozone (top four rows). Values above are 
the average of the area-weighted global means, with the area weighted mean of the standard deviation of models at each point provided in parenthesis. Shown are net aerosol RF 
due to aerosol–radiation interaction (top, 10 models), carbonaceous aerosol RF due to aerosol-radiation interaction (2nd row, 7 models), aerosol ERF (3rd row, 8 models), ozone 
(4th row, 11 models), total anthropogenic composition forcing (WMGHG+ozone+aerosols; bottom left), aerosol atmospheric absorption including rapid adjustment (bottom right, 
6 models). Note that RF and ERF means are shown with different colour scales, and standard deviation colour scales vary among rows.
=== PAGE 46 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
704
All aerosol RF
Preindustrial to present-day forcing
0.25 W m-2
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
.70
.35
0
1.05
2.10
1.75
1.40
2.45
ACCMIP
ACCMIP
AeroCom
AeroCom
-0.27 W m-2
 0.15 (0.27) W m-2
0.18 W m-2
0.07 (0.12) W m-2
Fossil & biofuel Black Carbon RF
0.10 (0.12) W m-2
-0.26 W m-2
 0.14 (0.30) W m-2
Multi-model mean
Standard deviation
Figure 8.24 |  Spatial pattern of ACCMIP and 16 AeroCom models 1850 to 2000 RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction, mean values (left) and standard deviation (right). Note 
that different carbonaceous aerosol diagnostics are used here compared to Figure 8.23, due to available AeroCom fields. Values above are the average of the area-weighted global 
means, with the area weighted mean of the standard deviation of models at each point provided in parentheses.
=== PAGE 47 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
705
8.6.2	
Spatial Evolution of Radiative Forcing and
Response over the Industrial Era
8.6.2.1	 Regional Forcing Changes During the Industrial Era
The spatial distribution of the WMGHG RF has shifted only slightly over 
the industrial period; however the RF spatial distributions for NTCFs 
has shifted with emissions, due to the timing of regional development 
and implementation of pollution standards (Supplementary Material 
Figures 8.SM.1 and 8.SM.2 show regional trends and emissions maps; 
Lamarque et al., 2013). Figure 8.25 shows how the distributions of 
aerosol and ozone forcings are modelled to have changed up to 1930, 
1980 and 2000. Substantial industrial coal-burning in the early part of 
the 20th century occurred in the northeastern United States and West­
ern Europe, leading to stronger sulphate and BC forcing near those 
2000 vs 1850
All aerosol RF
1980 vs 1850
1930 vs 1850
Carbonaceous aerosol RF
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
 0.21 W m-2
 0.17 W m-2
 0.07 W m-2
-1.5
-2.5
-3.5
-.5
1.25
.75
.25
1.75
 -1.03 W m-2
 -0.27 W m-2
0.29 W m-2
Ozone RF
 0.27 W m-2
 0.09 W m-2
 -0.29 W m-2
 -0.06 W m-2
-0.26 W m-2
All aerosol ERF
 -1.17 W m-2
Figure 8.25 |  Multi-model mean RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction of all aerosols, carbonaceous aerosols, ozone, and aerosol ERF (W m–2) for the indicated times based on 
the ACCMIP simulations. Global area-weighted means are given in the upper right.
regions (Figure 8.25, left). Between 1950 and 1970, coal burning for 
power generation increased while coal burning for other purposes was 
replaced by oil and natural gas and motor vehicle usage grew rapidly in 
these regions, leading to more sulphate and less BC. Peak aerosol forc­
ing in North America and Europe occurred around 1970–1980 (Figure 
8.25, second column), while Asian development led to increased bio­
fuel and fossil fuel sources of aerosols and ozone precursors toward 
the end of the century. During the final decades of the century, des­
ulphurization controls reduced sulphur emissions from North America 
and Europe, resulting in reduced negative forcing in these regions and 
positive Arctic aerosol forcing. The SH ozone hole developed during the 
final three decades, with negative forcing over high latitudes. Biomass 
burning generated ozone and carbonaceous aerosols in NH high-lati­
tudes early in the century, with increased tropical burning from mid to 
late century.
=== PAGE 48 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
706
Aerosol ERF grew rapidly from 1930 to 1980, as did RF due to aero­
sol–radiation interaction, with a spatial structure reflecting both the 
influence of aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions that are 
especially strong over pollution outflow regions and over areas with 
high surface albedo. From 1980 to 2000, aerosol ERF continued to 
become more negative even as negative RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction grew weaker, with the spatial pattern showing strengthen­
ing of aerosol ERF over Asia and weakening of aerosol ERF over North 
America and Europe.
Soil dust has changed since the pre-industrial due to land disturbance 
and resulting desertification (a forcing) and to changes in climate (a 
feedback). Mahowald et al. (2010) showed approximate doubling in 
dust loading over the 20th century (–0.1 W m–2; consistent with the 
best estimate in Section 7.5.2; Section 8.3.4.2), primarily from the 
Saharan and Middle Eastern Deserts, with largest increase from the 
1950s to the 1980s (–0.3 W m–2), followed by a leveling. The increased 
dustiness reduces model precipitation within the Saharan source 
region, improving agreement with observed precipitation.
Aerosol loading changes during the past century have impacted radi­
ation at the surface (Section 2.3.3), with peak radiation reductions 
in North America and Europe in the 1980s, and ongoing reduction in 
South and East Asia (Wild, 2009). The AR4 and CMIP5 models simu­
lated these trends but underestimated their magnitude, the decadal 
temperature variations and the diurnal temperature range over land 
(Wild, 2009; see Chapter 9).
Changes in spatial patterns of species and their forcing over the cen­
tury are difficult to validate due to sparse observations of short-lived 
species. Some constraint comes from limited historical observations 
in ice core records and from shorter trends beginning in late century 
from satellite and surface-based site measurements. The emissions 
estimates for historical species are very uncertain, especially for car­
bonaceous aerosols and dust. Therefore, the confidence in the histor­
ical forcing pattern changes is low for RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction and ozone, and very low for ERF, carbonaceous aerosols 
and dust.
8.6.2.2	 Relationship Between Regional Forcing Patterns and
Climate Response During the Industrial Era
An increasing body of research considers how spatial variations in RF 
affect climate response. Detection and attribution methods have had 
limited success in discerning statistically significant regional climate 
signals from regional forcing, due to large internal climate variability 
at regional scales, uncertainty in model processes and sparse region­
al observational records (Chapter 10). Meanwhile, research including 
model sensitivity studies for NTCFs, which vary strongly in space in 
time, explores climate response patterns.
In AR4 (Forster et al., 2007; Knutti et al., 2008) it was argued that the 
spatial pattern of forcing is not indicative of the pattern of climate 
response. Rather, the response is linked more closely to TOA flux result­
ing from the climate feedback spatial patterns (Boer and Yu, 2003; 
Taylor et al., 2011; Ming and Ramaswamy, 2012), with the lapse rate, 
surface albedo and cloud feedbacks explaining most of the ­temperature 
response. Yet Crook and Forster (2011) showed that both the spatial 
distribution of climate feedbacks and of heterogeneous forcing played 
important roles in the patterns of 20th century temperature changes. 
Other studies since AR4 have probed relationships between forcing 
patterns and climate responses.
Broad links between forcing and climate response have been identi­
fied. Shindell et al. (2010) used multiple models to show that surface 
temperature changes are much more sensitive to latitudinal than longi­
tudinal variations in forcing. Shindell and Faluvegi (2009) used a model 
inverse approach to infer that NH aerosol reduction was associated 
with more than 70% of Arctic warming from the 1970s to the 2000s, 
and that Arctic and much of the SH surface temperature changes are 
strongly affected by remote forcing changes (alsoSection 10.3.1.1.4). 
Voulgarakis and Shindell (2010) defined a regional transient tempera­
ture sensitivity parameter, or temperature response per unit forcing for 
each 4-degree latitude band. Using observed surface air temperature 
changes they showed that the parameter is best constrained from 50°S 
to 25°N, where the value is 0.35°C (W m–2)–1, smaller than at northern 
higher latitudes, and 35% smaller than in AR4 models.
Some aerosol model studies have demonstrated highly localized cli­
mate response to regional forcing. Significant regional cooling and 
hydrological shifts in the eastern USA and in Eastern Asia during the 
last half of the 20th century were modelled and attributed to local 
aerosols (Leibensperger et al., 2008, 2012a, 2012b; Chang et al., 2009) 
and localized warming projected for aerosol reductions (Mickley et al., 
2012). Observations have also linked historical trends in aerosols and 
temperature (Ruckstuhl et al., 2008; Philipona et al., 2009).
Since AR4, there has been new research on aerosol influences on the 
hydrologic cycle (also Sections 7.4, 7.6.4, 10.3.3.1 and 11.3.2.4.3). 
Increased aerosol loading, with greater surface energy flux reduction 
in the NH, has been implicated in the observed southward shift of the 
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) towards the hemisphere with 
smaller surface energy reduction: southward up to the 1980s with a 
reversal since (e.g., Denman et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2007). Several 
studies have modelled an associated reduction in NH precipitation 
and associated shifts in the Hadley circulation (e.g., Rotstayn et al., 
2000; Williams et al., 2001; Ming et al., 2011). The ITCZ shift may in 
turn be responsible for broad regional precipitation changes, includ­
ing drying of the Sahel (e.g., Rotstayn and Lohmann, 2002; Biasutti 
and Giannini, 2006; Kawase et al., 2010; Ackerley et al., 2011) and 
northwestern Brazil (Cox et al., 2008), both of which peaked in the 
1980s. These hemispheric asymmetric ITCZ effects are overlaid on 
thermodynamic aerosol effects which moisten subtropical regions, 
countering GHG-induced drying of these regions (Ming et al., 2011). 
Studies indicate that aerosols are more effective than an equivalent 
WMGHG forcing for shifting precipitation, and that historical trends 
in several areas cannot be explained without including aerosol forcing 
(Bollasina et al., 2011; Booth et al., 2012; Shindell et al., 2012a; Shin­
dell et al., 2012b). However, confidence in attribution of any human 
influence on zonal shifts in precipitation distribution is only medium 
(Section 10.3.2.2).
There is increasing evidence but limited agreement that absorbing 
­aerosols influence cloud distributions (Section 7.3.4.2). Absorbing
=== PAGE 49 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
707
­aerosols apparently have complex influences on precipitation in mon­
soon regions. Model studies of Stephens et al. (2004) and Miller et 
al. (2004) showed that dust absorption over Africa enhances low-lev­
el convergence, vertical velocities and therefore local monsoon cir­
culation and precipitation. On the other hand, Kawase et al. (2010) 
showed that biomass burning BC may cause the decreasing precipita­
tion trend seen in tropical Africa during austral summer, due to reduc­
tion in evaporation and enhanced subsidence. The aerosol effects on 
the Indian monsoon are similarly complex, and have been the sub­
ject of numerous studies (e.g., Ramanathan et al., 2005; Chung and 
Ramanathan, 2006; Lau et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2009; Bollasina et 
al., (2011), but a clear picture of how the regional aerosol forcing 
correlates with responses has not yet fully emerged. Attribution of 
changes in monsoon to human influence generally has low confidence 
(Section 10.3).
Stratospheric ozone loss modelling has demonstrated an effect on the 
SH stratosphere similar to increased GHGs, cooling stratospheric tem­
peratures, strengthening the polar vortex and shifting the westerly jet 
poleward; however causing cooler Antarctic surface temperatures, with 
larger influence on austral summer conditions (Son et al., 2009; McLan­
dress et al., 2011; Thompson et al., 2011; see also Sections 10.3.3 and 
11.3.2.4.3.) In the troposphere, models indicate that increased tropo­
spheric ozone has caused warming, proportionally more in the NH and 
notably to the Arctic during winter, mainly during the second half of the 
20th century (Shindell et al., 2006a).
Albedo changes due to land use and land cover changes exert a heter­
ogeneous climate forcing (Figure 8.9). The surface albedo brightened 
on the one hand due to a shift from forest to brighter croplands, caus­
ing local cooling (e.g., Eliseev and Mokhov, 2011; Lee et al., 2011), but 
also darkened due to the re-expansion of forests to higher latitudes 
(Esper and Schweingruber, 2004) and increased vegetation height in 
snowy regions (Bonfils et al., 2012; also Section 8.3.5). Model studies 
have shown cooling from land use and land cover changes, especial­
ly over NH continents, although without demonstrating a detectable 
signal in observations (Matthews et al., 2004).
In addition to land use and climate-induced vegetation changes, CO2 
affects vegetation forcing indirectly, reducing transpiration from plants 
as stomata open less with increasing CO2, resulting in localized atmos­
pheric drying and warming (Section 11.3.2.3.1; Joshi and Gregory, 
2008). These are not included in the standard RF (Section 8.1) and may 
be considered feedbacks (Section 8.3.2). This is modelled to be largest 
over the Amazon, the central African forest, and to some extent over 
boreal and temperate forests (Andrews et al., 2011). In the coupled 
climate modelling study of Lawrence and Chase (2010), the vegetation 
changes caused significant reduction in evapotranspiration, drying and 
warming in tropical and subtropical regions, with insignificant cool­
ing at higher latitudes. Overall, vegetation changes may have caused 
modest cooling at high latitudes and warming at low latitudes, but the 
uncertainties are large and confidence is very low.
Deposition of BC on snow and ice, and loss of snow and ice darken 
the surface, reduces albedo, and enhances climate warming. Substan­
tial snow-cover reduction of North America leads to warmer North 
American summertime temperature in models having a strong snow 
albedo feedback. These forcings can also have non-local impacts that 
result from enhanced land-ocean temperature contrast, increasing sur­
face convergence over land and divergence over oceans. A poleward 
intensification of the high pressure patterns and subtropical jet may 
also result (Fletcher et al., 2009). BC contributions to snow darken­
ing reduces snow cover, however the magnitude of the effect is very 
uncertain (see Sections 7.5.2.3 and 8.3.4.4). A model study calculated 
BC-albedo reduction to cause about 20% Arctic snow/ice cover reduc­
tion and 20% of Arctic warming over the previous century (Koch et al., 
2011). However, reductions in Arctic soot during the past two decades 
(e.g., Hegg et al., 2009) have likely reversed that trend (e.g., Koch et al., 
2011; Skeie et al., 2011b; Lee et al., 2013). Cryospheric feedbacks and 
atmospheric dynamical responses in models have an associated pole­
ward shift in the temperature response to aerosol–cloud interactions 
(Kristjansson et al., 2005; Koch et al., 2009a; Chen et al., 2010).
Solar spectral (UV) irradiance variations along the solar cycle induce 
ozone responses by modifying the ozone production rate through pho­
tolysis of molecular oxygen (Section 8.4.1.4.1), and the resulting dif­
ferential heating can drive circulation anomalies that lead to regional 
temperature and precipitation changes (Haigh, 1999; Shindell et al., 
2006b; Frame and Gray, 2010; Gray et al., 2010). Such solar forcing 
may influence natural modes of circulation such as the Northern Annu­
lar Mode (e.g., Shindell et al., 2001; de la Torre et al., 2006; Ineson et al., 
2011), the South Asian Summer Monsoon (Fan et al., 2009), the South­
ern Annular Mode (Kuroda and Kodera, 2005; Roscoe and Haigh, 2007) 
or the ENSO (Mann et al., 2005). The pattern of temperature response 
is less uniform than the forcing, for example, warming in the NH, but 
little response in the SH due to temperature moderation by wind speed 
enhancement effects on ocean circulation (Swingedouw et al., 2011). 
Regional responses to solar forcing are mediated by the stratosphere, 
so that reproducing such change requires spectrally varying solar forc­
ing rather than TSI forcing (Lee et al., 2009; Section 8.4.1.4).
Stratospheric aerosol clouds (also Section 8.4.2.2) from tropical erup­
tions spread poleward and can cover an entire hemisphere or the 
globe, depending on the initial latitudinal spread. The aerosol eruption 
cloud from the 1963 Agung was confined mainly to the SH; the 1982 El 
Chichón mainly to the NH; and the 1991 Pinatubo covered the globe, 
all with an e-folding lifetime of about 1 year (e.g., Antuña et al., 2003). 
High-latitude eruptions typically stay confined to the high-latitude 
regions with shorter lifetimes of 2 to 4 months (Kravitz and Robock, 
2011). Volcanic aerosols primarily scatter solar radiation back to space, 
but also absorb longwave radiation with the former larger by an order 
of magnitude. Stratospheric aerosol absorption heats the layer where 
they reside and produces distinct vertical and horizontal distributions 
of the heating rate. The temperature and chemical effects of the aer­
osols also enhance ozone destruction, which somewhat counteracts 
the radiative heating (Stenchikov et al., 2002). For tropical eruptions, 
this may affect atmospheric dynamics, with a stronger polar vortex, a 
positive mode of the Arctic Oscillation, and winter warming over NH 
continents (Robock, 2000). Climate responses to solar and volcanic 
forcings are further discussed in the context of detection and attribu­
tion of millennial climate change (see Section 10.7).
The study of how climate responds to regionally varying patterns of 
forcing is critical for understanding how local activities impact regional
=== PAGE 50 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
708
climate; however, the studies are exploratory and generally evoke very 
low confidence. However there is medium to high confidence in some 
qualitative but robust features, such as the damped warming of the 
NH and shifting of the ITCZ from aerosols, and positive feedbacks from 
high-latitude snow and ice albedo changes.
8.6.3	
Spatial Evolution of Radiative Forcing and
Response for the Future
Most components of aerosols and ozone precursors are estimated to 
decrease toward the end of this century in the RCPs except CH4 in 
RCP8.5 (Figure 8.2) and nitrate aerosols, though some species reach 
the maximum amounts of emissions around the mid-21st century 
(Figure 8.2). The RCPs therefore contrast with the emission scenarios 
for TAR and AR4, which were based on Special Report on Emissions 
Scenarios (SRES) and have future projections of larger increase in the 
near-term climate forcers (NTCFs). It has been questioned whether 
such low emission of NTCFs is possible in the future given the current 
policies (Pozzer et al., 2012). This section surveys spatial differences in 
the RF of aerosols and ozone for the future based on the RCPs.
Figure 8.26 shows the global distributions of changes in aerosol and 
ozone forcings in 2030 and 2100 relative to 2000 for RCP2.6 and 8.5 
(Shindell et al., 2013c). Both scenarios indicate reduced aerosol load­
ing, and thus positive forcing over Europe, North America and Asia by 
2100 where RF is above +0.5 W m–2 because of substantial reduction 
of scattering aerosols. The global mean RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction is estimated to be +0.12 and +0.08 W m–2 for RCP2.6 and 
8.5, respectively, in 2100. Though the RF by total anthropogenic aer­
osols is positive, reduced BC contributes substantial negative forcing 
especially over the similar regions. The global mean carbonaceous RF 
including both the effects of BC and OC is estimated to be –0.20 and 
–0.11 W m–2 for RCP2.6 and 8.5, respectively, in 2100. Early in the 
century, on the other hand, both scenarios indicate increased negative 
aerosol forcing over South Asia, with reversal between 2030 and 2100. 
Emissions of BC, OC and SO2 will reach their maximums early and 
middle in the century for RCP2.6 and 8.5, respectively in India. In RCP6, 
high emission levels of SO2 in China persist until the mid-21st century 
(Supplementary Material Figure 8.SM.1), and then it is predicted to 
keep a high negative RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction over East 
Asia. The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction for carbonaceous aer­
osol is positive over East and South Asia in 2030 relative to 2000 for 
RCP8.5 because BC emission is also larger in 2030. Over central and 
southern Africa, a change in the future RF due to aerosol–radiation 
interaction based on RCPs is not clear mainly because of uncertainties 
in the wildfires emissions (see Section 7.3.5.3). The global mean total 
RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction in the future is rather small due 
to offsetting effects, with reductions in BC, increases in nitrate aero­
sols, and reductions in scattering aerosols each causing substantially 
more forcing than the net.
Emissions and atmospheric loadings of natural aerosols are affected 
by climate change. There is, however, no consensus among studies on 
future trends of their changes for major natural aerosols, mineral dust 
and sea salt, as indicated in Section 7.3.5.1. The spatial pattern of the 
aerosol forcing may be influenced by natural aerosols due to ­reduction 
in sea ice cover leading to increased emission of high-latitude sea 
salt (Struthers et al., 2011; Takemura, 2012) and SOA from vegetation 
changes (Tsigaridis and Kanakidou, 2007).
The simulations applying the RCPs indicate that the latitude of max­
imum emission of NTCFs, and therefore of maximum RF, is projected 
to shift somewhat southward for the next few decades (in 2030 of 
Figure 8.26). The shift of peak aerosol loading southward is expected to 
cause the ITCZ to continue to shift northward. This, in combination with 
warming and drying over tropical land, has been modelled to lead to 
greatly enhanced drought conditions in the Amazon (Cox et al., 2008). 
On the other hand, if the low-latitude aerosol is sufficiently absorbing, 
broadening of the ITCZ convergence region and enhanced cloud cover 
could result, as modelled for dust (Perlwitz and Miller, 2010).
Reductions in high-latitude BC are expected to contribute to reducing 
Arctic forcing (e.g., Koch et al., 2011), due to reduction in BC deposi­
tion on snow as well as in absorption of sunlight over bright surface. 
On the other hand, reduction in mid-high-latitude scattering aerosols 
may offset all or part of the impact of the local Arctic forcing change 
(Shindell et al., 2010; Koch et al., 2011).
Figure 8.26 also shows the ozone RF in 2030 and 2100 relative to 2000, 
which includes changes both in tropospheric and stratospheric ozone. 
Recovery of ozone in the stratosphere in the 21st century will result in 
positive forcing in the SH high latitudes in comparison with the year 
2000 for both the pathways. This is because of the reduced emissions 
of ozone-depleting substances controlled under the Montreal Protocol, 
with a small additional effect from a feedback of changes in temper­
ature and in the vertical circulation due to changes in stratospheric 
compositions (Kawase et al., 2011; Lamarque et al., 2011). In the trop­
osphere, on the other hand, a large difference in the CH4 emissions 
between RCP8.5 and the other pathways shown in Figure 8.2 leads 
to a different RF trend outside the SH high latitudes. Ozone recovery 
in the stratosphere and ozone increase in the troposphere leads to a 
positive RF all over the globe in RCP8.5 with a mean of +0.26 W m–2 
in 2100. The cancellation between positive RF due to ozone increase in 
the stratosphere and negative RF due to ozone decrease in the tropo­
sphere results in a global mean RF of –0.12 W m–2 in RCP2.6.
Figure 8.26 also shows the global distributions of changes in ERF due 
to both aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions in 2030 and 
2100 relative to 2000 for RCP8.5. Although the ERF includes rapid 
adjustments and therefore its magnitude is much larger than that of 
RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction, the spatial pattern is generally 
similar to RF. The ERF in 2100 shows positive values relative to 2000 
in North America, Europe and Asia even with RCP8.5, which indicates 
the aerosol forcing is projected to approach to the pre-industrial level.
=== PAGE 51 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
709
All aerosol RF
RCP 2.6
All aerosol RF
RCP 8.5
 0.09 W m-2
 0.12 W m-2
 0.01 W m-2
0.08 W m-2
Carbonaceous aerosol RF
RCP 2.6
Carbonaceous aerosol RF
RCP 8.5
Ozone RF
RCP 2.6
Ozone RF
RCP 8.5
 -0.12 W m-2
 0.26 W m-2
-.38
-.62
-.88
-.12
.62
.38
.12
.88
2030
 2100
 -0.02 W m-2
 -0.11 W m-2
 -0.03 W m-2
 -0.20 W m-2
 0.00 W m-2
 0.11 W m-2
-.75
-1.25
-1.75
-.25
2.5
1.5
.5
3.5
 0.27 W m-2
 0.90 W m-2
All aerosol ERF
RCP 8.5
Figure 8.26 |  Multi-model mean RF (W m–2) due to aerosol–radiation interaction of all anthropogenic aerosols (first and second rows) and anthropogenic carbonaceous (BC+OC) 
aerosols (third and fourth rows), and total ozone (fifth and sixth rows) in 2030 (left) and 2100 (right) relative to 2000 for RCP2.6 (top each) and RCP8.5 (bottom each) based on 
the ACCMIP simulations. The seventh row shows multi-model mean ERF (W m–2) by all anthropogenic aerosols in 2030 (left) and 2100 (right) relative to 2000 for RCP8.5. Global 
area-weighted means are given in the upper right of each panel.
=== PAGE 52 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
710
8.7	
Emission Metrics
8.7.1	
Metric Concepts
8.7.1.1	 Introduction
To quantify and compare the climate impacts of various emissions, 
it is necessary to choose a climate parameter by which to measure 
the effects; that is, RF, temperature response, and so forth. Thus, var­
ious choices are needed for the steps down the cause–effect chain 
from emissions to climate change and impacts (Figure 8.27 and Box 
8.4). Each step in the cause effect chain requires a modelling frame­
work. For assessments and evaluation one may—as an alternative to 
models that explicitly include physical processes resulting in forcing 
and responses—apply simpler measures or metrics that are based on 
results from complex models. Metrics are used to quantify the contri­
butions to climate change of emissions of different substances and can 
thus act as ‘exchange rates’ in multi-component policies or compar­
isons of emissions from regions/countries or sources/sectors. Metrics 
are also used in areas such as Life Cycle Assessments and Integrated 
Assessment Modelling (e.g., by IPCC WGIII).
Metrics can be given in absolute terms (e.g., K kg–1) or in relative terms 
by normalizing to a reference gas — usually CO2. To transform the 
effects of different emissions to a common scale — often called ‘CO2 
equivalent emissions’—the emission (Ei) of component i can be mul­
tiplied with the adopted normalized metric (Mi): Mi × Ei = CO2-eqi. 
Ideally, the climate effects of the calculated CO2 equivalent emissions 
should be the same regardless of the mix of components emitted. 
However, different components have different physical properties, and 
a metric that establishes equivalence with regard to one effect cannot 
guarantee equivalence with regard to other effects and over extended 
time periods, for example, Lauder et al. (2013), O’Neill (2000), Smith 
and Wigley (2000), Fuglestvedt et al. (2003).
Figure 8.27 |  The cause–effect chain from emissions to climate change and impacts showing how metrics can be defined to estimate responses to emissions (left) and for develop­
ment of multi-component mitigation (right). The relevance of the various effects increases downwards but at the same time the uncertainty also increases. The dotted line on the 
left indicates that effects and impacts can be estimated directly from emissions, while the arrows on the right side indicate how these estimates can be used in development of 
strategies for reducing emissions. (Adapted from Fuglestvedt et al., 2003, and Plattner et al., 2009.)
Metrics do not define goals and policy—they are tools that enable 
evaluation and implementation of multi-component policies (i.e., 
which emissions to abate). The most appropriate metric will depend 
on which aspects of climate change are most important to a particu­
lar application, and different climate policy goals may lead to differ­
ent conclusions about what is the most suitable metric with which 
to implement that policy, for example, Plattner et al. (2009); Tol et al. 
(2012). Metrics that have been proposed include physical metrics as 
well as more comprehensive metrics that account for both physical and 
economic dimensions (see 8.7.1.5 and WGIII, Chapter 3).
This section provides an assessment that focuses on the scientific 
aspects and utility of emission metrics. Extending such an assessment 
to include more policy-oriented aspects of their performance and 
usage such as simplicity, transparency, continuity, economic implica­
tions of usage of one metric over another, and so forth, is not given 
here as this is beyond the scope of WGI. However, consideration of 
such aspects is vital for user-assessments. In the following, the focus is 
on the more well-known Global Warming Potential (GWP) and Global 
Temperature change Potential (GTP), though other concepts are also 
briefly discussed.
8.7.1.2	 The Global Warming Potential Concept
The Global Warming Potential (GWP) is defined as the time-integrat­
ed RF due to a pulse emission of a given component, relative to a 
pulse emission of an equal mass of CO2 (Figure 8.28a and formula). 
The GWP was presented in the First IPCC Assessment (Houghton et al., 
1990), stating ‘It must be stressed that there is no universally accepted 
methodology for combining all the relevant factors into a single global 
warming potential for greenhouse gas emissions. A simple approach 
has been adopted here to illustrate the difficulties inherent in the 
concept, ...’. Further, the First IPCC Assessment gave no clear physical 
interpretation of the GWP.
=== PAGE 53 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
711
A direct interpretation is that the GWP is an index of the total energy 
added to the climate system by a component in question relative to 
that added by CO2. However, the GWP does not lead to equivalence 
with temperature or other climate variables (Fuglestvedt et al., 2000, 
2003; O’Neill, 2000; Daniel et al., 2012; Smith and Wigley, 2000; 
Tanaka et al., 2009). Thus, the name ‘Global Warming Potential’ may be 
somewhat misleading, and ‘relative cumulative forcing index’ would 
be more appropriate. It can be shown that the GWP is approximately 
equal to the ratio (normalizing by the similar expression for CO2) of the 
equilibrium temperature response due to a sustained emission of the 
species or to the integrated temperature response for a pulse emission 
(assuming efficacies are equal for the gases that are compared; O’Neill, 
2000; Prather, 2002; Shine et al., 2005a; Peters et al., 2011a; Azar and 
Johansson, 2012).
The GWP has become the default metric for transferring emissions of 
different gases to a common scale; often called ‘CO2 equivalent emis­
sions’ (e.g., Shine, 2009). It has usually been integrated over 20, 100 
or 500 years consistent with Houghton et al. (1990). Note, however 
that Houghton et al. presented these time horizons as ‘candidates for 
discussion [that] should not be considered as having any special sig­
nificance’. The GWP for a time horizon of 100 years was later adopted 
as a metric to implement the multi-gas approach embedded in the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
and made operational in the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. The choice of time 
horizon has a strong effect on the GWP values — and thus also on the 
calculated contributions of CO2 equivalent emissions by component, 
sector or nation. There is no scientific argument for selecting 100 years 
compared with other choices (Fuglestvedt et al., 2003; Shine, 2009). 
The choice of time horizon is a value judgement because it depends 
Box 8.4 |  Choices Required When Using Emission Metrics
Time frames: One can apply a backward-looking (i.e., historical) or a forward-looking perspective on the responses to emissions. In 
the forward-looking case one may use pulses of emissions, sustained emissions or emission scenarios. All choices of emission perturba­
tions are somewhat artificial and idealized, and different choices serve different purposes. One may use the level (e.g., degrees Celsius) 
or rate of change (e.g., degrees Celsius per decade). Furthermore, the effects of emissions may be estimated at a particular time or be 
integrated over time up to a chosen time horizon. Alternatively, discounting of future effects may be introduced (i.e., a weighting of 
effects over time).
Type of effect or end-point: Radiative forcing, temperature change or sea level change, for example, could be examined (Figure 
8.27). Metrics may also include eco/biological or socioeconomic damages. The choice of climate impact parameters is related to which 
aspects of climate change are considered relevant for interpretation of ‘dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system’ 
(UNFCCC Article 2).
Spatial dimension for emission and response: Equal-mass emissions of NTCFs from different regions can induce varying global 
mean climate responses, and the climate response also has a regional component irrespective of the regional variation in emissions. 
Thus, metrics may be given for region of emission as well as region of response.
Some of the choices involved in metrics are scientific (e.g., type of model, and how processes are included or parameterized in the 
models). Choices of time frames and climate impact are policy-related and cannot be based on science alone, but scientific studies can 
be used to analyse different approaches and policy choices.
Figure 8.28 |  (a) The Absolute Global Warming Potential (AGWP) is calculated by 
integrating the RF due to emission pulses over a chosen time horizon; for example, 20 
and 100 years (vertical lines). The GWP is the ratio of AGWP for component i over AGWP 
for the reference gas CO2. The blue hatched field represents the integrated RF from a 
pulse of CO2, while the green and red fields represent example gases with 1.5 and 13 
years lifetimes, respectively. (b) The Global Temperature change Potential (GTP) is based 
on the temperature response at a selected year after pulse emission of the same gases; 
e.g., 20 or 100 years (vertical lines). See Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11 for 
equations for calculations of GWP and GTP.
=== PAGE 54 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
712
(        )
on the relative weight assigned to effects at different times. Other 
important choices include the background atmosphere on which the 
GWP calculations are superimposed, and the way indirect effects and 
feedbacks are included (see Section 8.7.1.4).
For some gases the variation in GWP with time horizon mainly reflects 
properties of the reference gas, not the gas for which the GWP is cal­
culated. The GWP for NTCFs decreases with increasing time horizon, as 
GWP is defined with the integrated RF of CO2 in the denominator. As 
shown in Figure 8.29, after about five decades the development in the 
GWP for CH4 is almost entirely determined by CO2. However, for long-
lived gases (e.g., SF6) the development in GWP is controlled by both the 
increasing integrals of RF from the long-lived gas and CO2.
8.7.1.3	 The Global Temperature change Potential Concept
Compared to the GWP, the Global Temperature change Potential (GTP; 
Shine et al., 2005a) goes one step further down the cause–effect 
chain (Figure 8.27) and is defined as the change in global mean sur­
face temperature at a chosen point in time in response to an emission 
pulse—relative to that of CO2. Whereas GWP is integrated in time 
(Figure 8.28a), GTP is an end-point metric that is based on tempera­
ture change for a selected year, t, (see Figure 8.28b with formula). Like 
for the GWP, the impact from CO2 is normally used as reference, hence, 
for a component i, GTP(t)i = AGTP(t)i / AGTP(t)CO2 = ∆T((t)i /∆T(t)CO2, 
where AGTP is the absolute GTP giving temperature change per unit 
emission (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11 for equations 
and parameter values). Shine et al. (2005a) presented the GTP for both 
pulse and sustained emission changes based on an energy balance 
model as well as analytical equations. A modification was later intro­
duced (Shine et al., 2007) in which the time horizon is determined by 
the proximity to a target year as calculated by using scenarios and 
climate models (see Section 8.7.1.5).
Like GWP, the GTP values can be used for weighting the emissions 
to obtain ‘CO2 equivalents’ (see Section 8.7.1.1). This gives the 
Figure 8.29 |  Development of AGWP-CO2, AGWP-CH4 and GWP-CH4 with time hori­
zon. The yellow and blue curves show how the AGWPs changes with increasing time 
horizon. Because of the integrative nature the AGWP for CH4 (yellow curve) reaches a 
constant level after about five decades. The AGWP for CO2 continues to increase for cen­
turies. Thus the ratio which is the GWP (black curve) falls with increasing time horizon.
­temperature effects of emissions relative to that of CO2 for the chosen 
time horizon. As for GWP, the choice of time horizon has a strong effect 
on the metric values and the calculated contributions to warming.
In addition, the AGTP can be used to calculate the global mean temper­
ature change due to any given emission scenario (assuming linearity) 
using a convolution of the emission scenarios and AGTPi:
	
(8.1)
where i is component, t is time, and s is time of emission (Berntsen and 
Fuglestvedt, 2008; Peters et al., 2011b; Shindell et al., 2011).
By accounting for the climate sensitivity and the exchange of heat 
between the atmosphere and the ocean, the GTP includes physical pro­
cesses that the GWP does not. The GTP accounts for the slow response 
of the (deep) ocean, thereby prolonging the response to emissions 
beyond what is controlled by the decay time of the atmospheric con­
centration. Thus the GTP includes both the atmospheric adjustment 
time scale of the component considered and the response time scale 
of the climate system.
The GWP and GTP are fundamentally different by construction and dif­
ferent numerical values can be expected. In particular, the GWPs for 
NTCFs, over the same time frames, are higher than GTPs due to the 
integrative nature of the metric. The GTP values can be significantly 
affected by assumptions about the climate sensitivity and heat uptake 
by the ocean. Thus, the relative uncertainty ranges are wider for the 
GTP compared to GWP (see Section 8.7.1.4). The additional uncertainty 
is a typical trade-off when moving along the cause–effect chain to an 
effect of greater societal relevance (Figure 8.27). The formulation of the 
ocean response in the GTP has a substantial effect on the values; thus 
its characterization also represents a trade-off between simplicity and 
accuracy. As for GWP, the GTP is also influenced by the background 
atmosphere, and the way indirect effects and feedbacks are included 
(see Section 8.7.1.4).
8.7.1.4	 Uncertainties and Limitations related to Global Warming 
Potential and Global Temperature change Potential
The uncertainty in the numerator of GWP; that is, the AGWPi (see for­
mula in Figure 8.28a) is determined by uncertainties in lifetimes (or 
perturbation lifetimes) and radiative efficiency. Inclusion of indirect 
effects increases uncertainties (see below). For the reference gas CO2, 
the uncertainty is dominated by uncertainties in the impulse response 
function (IRF) that describes the development in atmospheric concen­
tration that follows from an emission pulse (Joos et al., 2013); see Box 
6.2 and Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12. The IRF is sensitive 
to model representation of the carbon cycle, pulse size and background 
CO2 concentrations and climate.
Based on a multi-model study, Joos et al. (2013) estimate uncertain­
ty ranges for the time-integrated IRF for CO2 to be ±15% and ±25% 
(5 to 95% uncertainty range) for 20- and 100-year time horizons, 
respectively. Assuming quadratic error propagation, and ±10% uncer­
tainty in radiative efficiency, the uncertainty ranges in AGWP for CO2 
were estimated to be ±18% and ±26% for 20 and 100 years. These 
∆𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡=
𝐸𝐸! 𝑠𝑠𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴! 𝑡𝑡−𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
!
!
!
=== PAGE 55 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
713
­uncertainties affect all metrics that use CO2 as reference. Reisinger et 
al. (2010) and Joos et al. (2013) show that these uncertainties increase 
with time horizon.
The same factors contribute to uncertainties in the GTP, with an addi­
tional contribution from the parameters describing the ocean heat 
uptake and climate sensitivity. In the first presentation of the GTP, 
Shine et al. (2005a) used one time constant for the climate response in 
their analytical expression. Improved approaches were used by Bouch­
er and Reddy (2008), Collins et al. (2010) and Berntsen and Fuglestvedt 
(2008) that include more explicit representations of the deep ocean 
that increased the long-term response to a pulse forcing. Over the 
range of climate sensitivities from AR4, GTP50 for BC was found to vary 
by a factor of 2, the CH4 GTP50 varied by about 50%, while for N2O 
essentially no dependence was found (Fuglestvedt et al., 2010). AGTPs 
for CO2 were also calculated in the multi-model study by Joos et al. 
(2013). They found uncertainty ranges in AGTP that are much larger 
than for AGWP; ±45% and ±90% for 20 and 100 years (5 to 95% 
uncertainty range). These uncertainty ranges also reflect the signal-to-
noise ratio, and not only uncertainty in the physical mechanisms.
There are studies combining uncertainties in various input parameters. 
Reisinger et al. (2011) estimated the uncertainty in the GWP for CH4 
and found an uncertainty of –30 to +40% for the GWP100 and –50 to 
+75% for GTP100 of CH4 (for 5 to 95% of the range). Boucher (2012) 
performed a Monte Carlo analysis with uncertainties in perturbation 
lifetime and radiative efficiency, and for GWP100 for CH4 (assuming a 
constant background atmosphere) he found ±20%, and –40 to +65 for 
GTP100 (for 5 to 95% uncertainty range).
Here we estimate uncertainties in GWP values based on the uncer­
tainties given for radiative efficiencies (Section 8.3.1), perturbation 
lifetimes, indirect effects and in the AGWP for the reference gas CO2 
(see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12). For CH4 GWP we esti­
mate an uncertainty of ±30% and ±40% for 20- and 100-year time 
horizons, respectively (for 5 to 95% uncertainty range). The uncertainty 
is dominated by AGWP for CO2 and indirect effects. For gases with life­
times of a century or more the uncertainties are of the order of ±20% 
and ±30% for 20- and 100-year horizons. The uncertainty in GWPs for 
gases with lifetimes of a few decades is estimated to be of the order 
of ±25% and ±35% for 20 and 100 years. For shorter-lived gases, the 
uncertainties in GWPs will be larger (see Supplementary Material Sec­
tion 8.SM.12 for a discussion of contributions to the total uncertainty.) 
For GTP, few uncertainty estimates are available in the literature. Based 
on the results from Joos et al. (2013), Reisinger et al. (2010) and Bou­
cher (2012) we assess the uncertainty to be of the order of ±75% for 
the CH4 GTP100.
The metric values are also strongly dependent on which processes 
are included in the definition of a metric. Ideally all indirect effects 
(Sections 8.2 and 8.3) should be taken into account in the calculation 
of metrics. The indirect effects of CH4 on its own lifetime, tropospher­
ic ozone and stratospheric water have been traditionally included in 
its GWP. Boucher et al. (2009) have quantified an indirect effect on 
CO2 when fossil fuel CH4 is oxidized in the atmosphere. Shindell et 
al. (2009) estimated the impact of reactive species emissions on both 
gaseous and aerosol forcing species and found that ozone precursors, 
including CH4, had an additional substantial climate effect because 
they increased or decreased the rate of oxidation of SO2 to sulphate 
aerosol. Studies with different sulphur cycle formulations have found 
lower sensitivity (Collins et al., 2010; Fry et al., 2012). Collins et al. 
(2010) postulated an additional component to their GWPs and GTPs 
for ozone precursors due to the decreased productivity of plants under 
higher levels of surface ozone. This was estimated to have the same 
magnitude as the ozone and CH4 effects. This effect, however, has 
so far only been examined with one model. In a complex and inter­
connected system, feedbacks can become increasingly complex, and 
uncertainty of the magnitude and even direction of feedback increases 
the further one departs from the primary perturbation, resulting in a 
trade-off between completeness and robustness, and hence utility for 
decision-making.
Gillett and Matthews (2010) included climate–carbon feedbacks in 
calculations of GWP for CH4 and N2O and found that this increased 
the values by about 20% for 100 years. For GTP of CH4 they found 
an increase of ~80%. They used numerical models for their studies 
and suggest that climate–carbon feedbacks should be considered and 
parameterized when used in simple models to derive metrics. Col­
lins et al. (2013) parameterize the climate-carbon feedback based on 
Friedlingstein et al. (2006) and Arora et al. (2013) and find that this 
more than doubles the GTP100 for CH4. Enhancement of the GTP for 
CH4 due to carbon–climate feedbacks may also explain the higher GTP 
values found by Reisinger et al. (2010).
The inclusion of indirect effects and feedbacks in metric values has 
been inconsistent in the IPCC reports. In SAR and TAR, a carbon model 
without a coupling to a climate model was used for calculation of IRF 
for CO2 (Joos et al., 1996), while in AR4 climate-carbon feedbacks were 
included for the CO2 IRF (Plattner et al., 2008). For the time horizons 
20 and 100 years, the AGWPCO2 calculated with the Bern3D-LPJ model 
is, depending on the pulse size, 4 to 5% and 13 to 15% lower, respec­
tively, when carbon cycle–climate feedbacks are not included (Joos 
et al., 2013). While the AGWP for the reference gas CO2 included cli­
mate–carbon feedbacks, this is not the case for the non-CO2 gas in the 
numerator of GWP, as recognized by Gillett and Matthews (2010), Joos 
et al. (2013), Collins et al. (2013) and Sarofim (2012). This means that 
the GWPs presented in AR4 may underestimate the relative impacts 
of non-CO2 gases. The different inclusions of feedbacks partially repre­
sent the current state of knowledge, but also reflect inconsistent and 
ambiguous definitions. In calculations of AGWP for CO2 in AR5 we use 
the IRF for CO2 from Joos et al. (2013) which includes climate–carbon 
feedbacks. Metric values in AR5 are presented both with and without 
including climate–carbon feedbacks for non-CO2 gases. This feedback 
is based on the carbon-cycle response in a similar set of models (Arora 
et al., 2013) as used for the reference gas (Collins et al., 2013).
The effect of including this feedback for the non-reference gas increas­
es with time horizon due to the long-lived nature of the initiated CO2 
perturbation (Table 8.7). The relative importance also increases with 
decreasing lifetime of the component, and is larger for GTP than GWP 
due to the integrative nature of GWP. We calculate an increase in the 
CH4 GWP100 of 20%. For GTP100, however, the changes are much larger; 
of the order of 160%. For the shorter time horizons (e.g., 20 years) 
the effect of including this feedback is small (<5%) for both GWP
=== PAGE 56 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
714
Table 8.7 |  GWP and GTP with and without inclusion of climate–carbon feedbacks (cc fb) in response to emissions of the indicated non-CO2 gases (climate-carbon feedbacks in 
response to the reference gas CO2 are always included).
Lifetime (years)
GWP20
GWP100
GTP20
GTP100
CH4
b
12.4a
No cc fb
84
28
67
4
With cc fb
86
34
70
11
HFC-134a
13.4
No cc fb
3710
1300
3050
201
With cc fb
3790
1550
3170
530
CFC-11
45.0
No cc fb
6900
4660
6890
2340
With cc fb
7020
5350
7080
3490
N2O
121.0a
No cc fb
264
265
277
234
With cc fb
268
298
284
297
CF4
50,000.0
No cc fb
4880
6630
5270
8040
With cc fb
4950
7350
5400
9560
and GTP. For the more long-lived gases the GWP100 values increase 
by 10 to 12%, while for GTP100 the increase is 20 to 30%. Table 8.A.1 
gives metric values including the climate–carbon feedback for CO2 
only, while Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16 gives values for all 
halocarbons that include the climate–carbon feedback. Though uncer­
tainties in the carbon cycle are substantial, it is likely that including 
the climate–carbon feedback for non-CO2 gases as well as for CO2 
provides a better estimate of the metric value than including it only 
for CO2.
Emission metrics can be estimated based on a constant or variable 
background climate and this influences both the adjustment times and 
the concentration–forcing–temperature relationships. Thus, all metric 
values will need updating due to changing atmospheric conditions 
as well as improved input data. In AR5 we define the metric values 
with respect to a constant present-day condition of concentrations and 
climate. However, under non-constant background, Joos et al. (2013) 
found decreasing CO2 AGWP100 for increasing background levels (up to 
23% for RCP8.5). This means that GWP for all non-CO2 gases (except 
CH4 and N2O) would increase by roughly the same magnitude. Reising­
er et al. (2011) found a reduction in AGWP for CO2 of 36% for RCP8.5 
from 2000 to 2100 and that the CH4 radiative efficiency and AGWP 
also decrease with increasing CH4 concentration. Accounting for both 
effects, the GWP100 for CH4 would increase by 10 to 20% under low 
and mid-range RCPs by 2100, but would decrease by up to 10% by 
mid-century under the highest RCP. While these studies have focused 
on the background levels of GHGs, the same issues apply for tempera­
ture. Olivié et al. (2012) find different temperature IRFs depending on 
the background climate (and experimental set up).
User related choices (see Box 8.4) such as the time horizon can greatly 
affect the numerical values obtained for CO2 equivalents. For a change 
in time horizon from 20 to 100 years, the GWP for CH4 decreases by 
a factor of approximately 3 and its GTP by more than a factor of 10. 
Short-lived species are most sensitive to this choice. Some approaches 
have removed the time horizon from the metrics (e.g., Boucher, 2012), 
but discounting is usually introduced which means that a discount rate 
r (for the weighting function e–rt) must be chosen instead. The choice of 
discount rate is also value based (see WGIII, Chapter 3).
For NTCFs the metric values also depend on the location and timing 
of emission and whether regional or global metrics are used for these 
gases is also a choice for the users. Metrics are usually calculated for 
pulses, but some studies also give metric values that assume constant 
emissions over the full time horizon (e.g., Shine et al., 2005a; Jacobson, 
2010). It is important to be aware of the idealized assumption about 
constant future emissions (or change in emissions) of the compound 
being considered if metrics for sustained emissions are used.
8.7.1.5	 New Metric Concepts
New metric concepts have been developed both to modify physical 
metrics to address shortcomings as well as to replace them with met­
rics that account for economic dimensions of problems to which met­
rics are applied. Modifications to physical metrics have been proposed 
to better represent CO2 emissions from bioenergy, regional patterns of 
response, and for peak temperature limits.
Emissions of CO2 from the combustion of biomass for energy in nation­
al emission inventories are currently assumed to have no net RF, based 
on the assumption that these emissions are compensated by biomass 
regrowth (IPCC, 1996). However, there is a time lag between combus­
tion and regrowth, and while the CO2 is resident in the atmosphere 
it leads to an additional RF. Modifications of the GWP and GTP for 
bioenergy (GWPbio, GTPbio) have been developed (Cherubini et al., 2011; 
Cherubini et al., 2012). The GWP­bio give values generally between zero 
(current default for bioenergy) and one (current for fossil fuel emissions) 
(Cherubini et al., 2011), and negative values are possible for GTPbio 
due to the fast time scale of atmospheric–ocean CO2 exchange relative 
to the growth cycle of biomass (Cherubini et al., 2012). GWPbio and 
GTPbio have been used in only a few applications, and more research is 
needed to assess their robustness and applicability. Metrics for bioge­
ophysical effects, such as albedo changes, have been proposed (Betts, 
2000; Rotenberg and Yakir, 2010) , but as for NTCFs regional variations 
Notes:
Uncertainties related to the climate–carbon feedback are large, comparable in magnitude to the strength of the feedback for a single gas.
a	 Perturbation lifetime is used in the calculation of metrics.
b	 These values do not include CO2 from methane oxidation. Values for fossil methane are higher by 1 and 2 for the 20 and 100 year metrics, respectively (Table 8.A.1).
=== PAGE 57 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
715
are important (Claussen et al., 2001) and the RF concept may not be 
adequate (Davin et al., 2007).
New concepts have also been developed to capture information 
about regional patterns of responses and cancelling effects that are 
lost when global mean metrics are used. The use of nonlinear damage 
functions to capture information on the spatial pattern of responses 
has been explored (Shine et al., 2005b; Lund et al., 2012). In addi­
tion, the Absolute Regional Temperature Potential (ARTP) (Shindell, 
2012; Collins et al., 2013) has been developed to provide estimates 
of impacts at a sub-global scale. ARTP gives the time-dependent tem­
perature response in four latitude bands as a function of the regional 
forcing imposed in all bands. These metrics, as well as new regional 
precipitation metrics (Shindell et al., 2012b), require additional studies 
to determine their robustness.
Alternatives to the single basket approach adopted by the Kyoto Pro­
tocol are a component-by-component approach or a multi-basket 
approach (Rypdal et al., 2005; Daniel et al., 2012; Sarofim, 2012; Jack­
son, 2009). Smith et al. (2012) show how peak temperature change is 
constrained by cumulative emissions (see 12.5.4) for gases with long 
lifetimes and emissions rates for shorter-lived gases (including CH4). 
Thus, they divide gases into two baskets and present two metrics that 
can be used for estimating peak temperature for various emission sce­
narios. This division of gases into the two baskets is sensitive to the 
time of peak temperature in the different scenarios. The approach uses 
time invariant metrics that do not account for the timing of emissions 
relative to the target year. The choice of time horizon is implicit in the 
scenario assumed and this approach works only for a peak scenario.
A number of new metrics have been developed to add economic 
dimensions to purely physically based metrics such as the GWP and 
GTP. The use of physical metrics in policy contexts has been criticized 
by economists (Reilly and Richards, 1993; Schmalensee, 1993; Hammitt 
et al., 1996; Reilly et al., 1999; Bradford, 2001; De Cara et al., 2008). A 
prominent use of metrics is to set relative prices of gases when imple­
menting a multi-gas policy. Once a particular policy has been agreed 
on, economic metrics can address policy goals more directly than phys­
ical metrics by accounting not only for physical dimensions but also 
for economic dimensions such as mitigation costs, damage costs and 
discount rates (see WGIII, Chapter 3; Deuber et al., 2013).
For example, if mitigation policy is set within a cost-effectiveness 
framework with the aim of making the least cost mix of emissions 
reductions across components to meet a global temperature target, 
the ‘price ratio’ (Manne and Richels, 2001), also called the Global Cost 
Potential (GCP) (Tol et al., 2012), most directly addresses the goal. The 
choice of target is a policy decision; metric values can then be calcu­
lated based on an agreed upon target. Similarly, if policy is set within 
a cost–benefit framework, the metric that directly addresses the policy 
goal is the ratio of the marginal damages from the emission of a gas 
(i.e., the damage costs to society resulting from an incremental increase 
in emissions) relative to the marginal damages of an emission of CO2, 
known as the Global Damage Potential (GDP) (Kandlikar, 1995). Both 
types of metrics are typically determined within an integrated climate–
economy model, since they are affected both by the response of the 
climate system as well as by economic factors.
If other indexes, such as the GWP, are used instead of an economic 
cost-minimizing index, costs to society will increase. Cost implications 
at the project or country level could be substantial under some cir­
cumstances (Godal and Fuglestvedt, 2002; Shine, 2009; Reisinger et 
al., 2013). However, under idealized conditions of full participation in 
mitigation policy, the increase is relatively small at the global level, 
particularly when compared to the cost savings resulting from a multi- 
(as opposed to single-) gas mitigation strategy even when based on 
an imperfect metric (O’Neill, 2003; Aaheim et al., 2006; Johansson et 
al., 2006; Johansson, 2012; Reisinger et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2013).
Purely physical metrics continue to be used in many contexts due at 
least in part to the added uncertainties in mitigation and damage 
costs, and therefore in the values of economic metrics (Boucher, 2012). 
Efforts have been made to view purely physical metrics such as GWPs 
and GTPs as approximations of economic indexes. GTPs, for example, 
can be interpreted as an approximation of a Global Cost Potential 
designed for use in a cost-effectiveness setting (Shine et al., 2007; Tol 
et al., 2012). Quantitative values for time-dependent GTPs reproduce 
in broad terms several features of the Global Cost Potential such as the 
rising value of metrics for short-lived gases as a climate policy target is 
approached (Tanaka et al., 2013). Figure 8.30 shows how contributions 
of N2O, CH4 and BC to warming in the target year changes over time. 
The contributions are given relative to CO2 and show the effects of 
emission occurring at various times. Similarly, GWPs can be interpret­
ed as approximations of the Global Damage Potential designed for a 
cost–benefit framework (Tol et al., 2012). These interpretations of the 
GTP and GWP imply that using even a purely physical metric in an eco­
nomic policy context involves an implicit economic valuation.
In both cases, a number of simplifying assumptions must be made 
for these approximations to hold (Tol et al., 2012). For example, in 
the case of the GWP, the influence of emissions on RF, and therefore 
implicitly on costs to society, beyond the time horizon is not taken 
into account, and there are substantial numerical differences between 
GWP and GDP values (Marten and Newbold, 2012). In the case of the 
GTP, the influence of emissions on temperature change (and costs) is 
Figure 8.30 |  Global Temperature change Potential (GTP(t)) for CH4, nitrous oxide 
and BC for each year from year of emission to the time at which the temperature 
change target is reached. The (time-invariant) GWP100 is also shown for N2O and CH4 
for ­comparison.
=== PAGE 58 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
716
­included only at the time the target is reached, but not before nor 
after. Other metrics have been developed to more closely approximate 
GCPs or GDPs. The Cost-Effective Temperature Potential (CETP) repro­
duces values of the GCP more closely than does the GTP (Johansson, 
2012). It is similar to the GTP but accounts for post-target temperature 
effects based on an assumption about how to value costs beyond the 
time the target is reached. Metrics have also been proposed that take 
into account forcing or temperature effects that result from emissions 
trajectories over broad time spans, and that behave similarly to GCP 
and GTP (Tanaka et al., 2009; Manning and Reisinger, 2011) or to GWP 
(e.g., O’Neill, 2000; Peters et al., 2011a; Gillett and Matthews, 2010; 
Azar and Johansson, 2012).
8.7.1.6	 Synthesis
In the application and evaluation of metrics, it is important to distin­
guish between two main sources of variation in metric values. While 
scientific choices of input data have to be made, there are also choic­
es involving value judgements. For some metrics such choices are not 
always explicit and transparent. The choice of metric type and time 
horizon will for many components have a much larger effect than 
improved estimates of input parameters and can have strong effects 
on perceived impacts of emissions and abatement strategies.
In addition to progress in understanding of GWP, new concepts have 
been introduced or further explored since AR4. Time variant metrics 
introduce more dynamical views of the temporal contributions that 
accounts for the proximity to a prescribed target (in contrast to the tra­
ditional static GWP). Time variant metrics can be presented in a format 
that makes changing metric values over time predictable.
As metrics use parameters further down the cause effect chain the met­
rics become in general more policy relevant, but at the same time the 
uncertainties increase. Furthermore, metrics that account for regional 
variations in sensitivity to emissions or regional variation in response 
could give a very different emphasis to various emissions. Many spe­
cies, especially NTCFs, produce distinctly regionally heterogeneous RF 
and climate response patterns. These aspects are not accounted for in 
the commonly used global scale metrics.
The GWPs and GTPs have had inconsistent treatment of indirect effects 
and feedbacks. The GWPs reported in AR4 include climate–carbon 
feedbacks for the reference gas CO2 but not for the non-CO2 gases. 
Such feedbacks may have significant impacts on metrics and should be 
treated consistently. More studies are needed to assess the importance 
of consistent treatment of indirect effects/feedbacks in metrics.
The weighting of effects over time—choice of time horizon in the 
case of GWP and GTP—is value based. Discounting is an alternative, 
which also includes value judgements and is equally controversial. The 
weighting used in the GWP is a weight equal to one up to the time hori­
zon and zero thereafter, which is not in line with common approaches 
for evaluation of future effects in economics (e.g., as in WGIII, Chapter 
3). Adoption of a fixed horizon of e.g., 20, 100 or 500 years will inev­
itably put no weight on the long-term effect of CO2 beyond the time 
horizon (Figure 8.28 and Box 6.1). While GWP integrates the effects up 
to a chosen time horizon the GTP gives the temperature just for one 
chosen year with no weight on years before or after. The most appro­
priate metric depends on the particular application and which aspect 
of ­climate change is considered relevant in a given context. The GWP 
is not directly related to a temperature limit such as the 2°C target 
(Manne and Richels, 2001; Shine et al., 2007; Manning and Reisinger, 
2011; Smith et al., 2012; Tol et al., 2012; Tanaka et al., 2013), whereas 
some economic metrics and physical end-point metrics like the GTP 
may be more suitable for this purpose.
To provide metrics that can be useful to the users and policymakers 
a more effective dialog and discussion on three topics is needed: (1) 
which applications particular metrics are meant to serve; (2) how com­
prehensive metrics need to be in terms of indirect effects and feed­
backs, and economic dimensions; and—related to this (3) how impor­
tant it is to have simple and transparent metrics (given by analytical 
formulations) versus more complex model-based and thus model-de­
pendent metrics. These issues are also important to consider in a wider 
disciplinary context (e.g., across the IPCC Working Groups). Finally, it 
is important to be aware that all metric choices, even ‘traditional’ or 
‘widely used’ metrics, contain implicit value judgements as well as 
large uncertainties.
8.7.2	
Application of Metrics
8.7.2.1	 Metrics for Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide,
Halocarbons and Related Compounds
Updated (A)GWP and (A)GTP values for CO2, CH4, N2O, CFCs, HCFCs, 
bromofluorocarbons, halons, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, NF3, and related halogen-
containing compounds are given for some illustrative and tentative 
time horizons in Tables 8.7, 8.A.1 and Supplementary Material Table 
8.SM.16. The input data and methods for calculations of GWPs and 
GTPs are documented in the Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.13. 
Indirect GWPs that account for the RF caused by depletion of strat­
ospheric ozone (consistent with Section 8.3.3) are given for selected 
gases in Table 8.A.2.
The confidence in the ability to provide useful metrics at time scales of 
several centuries is very low due to nonlinear effects, large uncertain­
ties for multi-century processes and strong assumptions of constant 
background conditions. Thus, we do not give metric values for longer 
time scales than 100 years (see discussion in Supplementary Material 
Section 8.SM.11). However, these time scales are important to consider 
for gases such as CO2, SF6 and PFCs. For CO2, as much as 20 to 40% of 
the initial increase in concentration remains after 500 years. For PFC-
14, 99% of an emission is still in the atmosphere after 500 years. The 
effects of emissions on these time scales are discussed in Chapter 12.
The GWP values have changed from previous assessments due to 
new estimates of lifetimes, impulse response functions and radiative 
efficiencies. These are updated due to improved knowledge and/or 
changed background levels. Because CO2 is used as reference, any 
changes for this gas will affect all metric values via AGWP changes. 
Figure 8.31 shows how the values of radiative efficiency (RE), integrat­
ed impulse response function (IRF) and consequentially AGWP for CO2 
have changed from earlier assessments relative to AR5 values. The net 
effect of change in RE and IRF is an increase of approximately 1% and
=== PAGE 59 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
717
6% from AR4 to AR5 in AGWP for CO2 for 20 and 100 years, respective­
ly (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12). These increases in 
the AGWP of the reference gas lead to corresponding decreases in the 
GWPs for all non-CO2 gases. Continued increases in the atmospheric 
levels of CO2 will lead to further changes in GWPs (and GTPs) in the 
future.
To understand the factors contributing to changes relative to AR4, 
comparisons are made here using the AR5 values that include climate–
carbon feedbacks for CO2 only. Relative to AR4 the CH4 AGWP has 
changed due to changes in perturbation lifetime, a minor change in RE 
due to an increase in background concentration, and changes in the 
estimates of indirect effects. The indirect effects on O3 and stratospheric 
H2O are accounted for by increasing the effect of CH4 by 50% and 15%, 
respectively (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.12). The ozone 
effect has doubled since AR4 taking into account more recent studies 
as detailed in Sections 8.3.3 and 8.5.1. Together with the changes in 
AGWP for CO2 the net effect is increased GWP values of CH4.
The GWPs for N2O are lower here compared to AR4. A longer perturba­
tion lifetime is used in AR5, while the radiative efficiency is lower due 
to increased abundances of CH4 and N2O. In addition, the reduction in 
CH4 via stratospheric O3, UV fluxes and OH levels due to increased N2O 
abundance is included in GWPs and GTP. Owing to large uncertainties 
related to altitude of changes, we do not include the RF from strato­
spheric ozone changes as an indirect effect of N2O.
Lifetimes for most of the halocarbons are taken from WMO (2011) and 
many of these have changed from AR4. The lifetimes of CFC-114, CFC-
115 and HCF-161 are reduced by approximately 40%, while HFC-152 
Figure 8.31 |  Changes in the radiative efficiency (RE), integrated impulse response 
function (IRF) and Absolute Global Warming Potential (AGWP) for CO2 for 100 years 
from earlier IPCC Assessment Reports normalized relative to the values given in AR5. 
The ‘original’ values are calculated based on the methods explained or value reported 
in each IPCC Assessment Report. The ‘updated’ values are calculated based on the 
methods used in AR5, but the input values from each Assessment Report. The differ­
ence is primarily in the formula for the RE, which was updated in TAR. The different 
integrated IRF in TAR relates to a different parameterisation of the same IRF (WMO, 
1999). Changes represent both changes in scientific understanding and a changing 
background atmospheric CO2 concentration (note that y-axis starts from 0.8). The lines 
connecting individual points are meant as a visual guide and not to represent the values 
between different Assessment Reports.
is reduced by one third. Among the hydrofluoroethers (HFEs) there are 
also several large changes in lifetimes. In addition, substantial updates 
of radiative efficiencies are made for several important gases; CFC-
11, CFC-115, HCFC-124, HCFC-225cb, HFC-143a, HFC-245fa, CCl4, 
CHCl3, and SF6. The radiative efficiency for carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) 
is higher now and the GWP100 has increased by almost 25% from 
AR4. Uncertainties in metric values are given in Section 8.7.1.4. See 
also Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12 and footnote to Table 
8.A.1. As can be seen from Table 8.A.2, some ODS have strong indi­
rect effects through stratospheric ozone forcing, which for some of the 
gases reduce their net GWP100 values substantially (and for the halons, 
to large negative values). Note that, consistent with Section 8.3.3, the 
uncertainties are large; ±100% for this indirect effect.
When climate-carbon feedbacks are included for both the non-CO2 and 
reference gases, all metric values increase relative to the methodolo­
gy used in AR4, sometimes greatly (Table 8.7, Supplementary Material 
Table 8.SM.16). Though the uncertainties range for these metric values 
is greater, as uncertainties in climate-carbon feedbacks are substantial, 
these calculations provide a more consistent methodology.
8.7.2.2	 Metrics for Near-Term Climate Forcers
The GWP concept was initially used for the WMGHGs, but later for 
NTCFs as well. There are, however, substantial challenges related to 
calculations of GWP (and GTP) values for these components, which 
is reflected in the large ranges of values in the literature. Below we 
present and assess the current status of knowledge and quantification 
of metrics for various NTCFs.
8.7.2.2.1	
Nitrogen oxides
Metric values for NOX usually include the short-lived ozone effect, 
CH4 changes and the CH4-controlled O3 response. NOX also causes RF 
through nitrate formation, and via CH4 it affects stratospheric H2O and 
through ozone it influences CO2. In addition, NOx affects CO2 through 
nitrogen deposition (fertilization effect). Due to high reactivity and 
the many nonlinear chemical interactions operating on different time 
scales, as well as heterogeneous emission patterns, calculation of net 
climate effects of NOX is difficult. The net effect is a balance of large 
opposing effects with very different temporal behaviours. There is also 
a large spread in values among the regions due to variations in chem­
ical and physical characteristics of the atmosphere.
As shown in Table 8.A.3 the GTP and GWP values are very different. 
This is due to the fundamentally different nature of these two metrics 
(see Figure 8.28) and the way they capture the temporal behaviour of 
responses to NOx emissions. Time variation of GTP for NOX is complex, 
which is not directly seen by the somewhat arbitrary choices of time 
horizon, and the net GTP is a fine balance between the contributing 
terms. The general pattern for NOX is that the short-lived ozone forc­
ing is always positive, while the CH4-induced ozone forcing and CH4 
forcing are always negative (see Section 8.5.1). Nitrate aerosols from 
NOx emission are not included in Table 8.A.3. For the GTP, all estimates 
for NOX from surface sources give a negative net effect. As discussed 
in Section 8.7.1.4 Collins et al. (2010) and Shindell et al. (2009) imple­
mented further indirect effects, but these are not included in Table
=== PAGE 60 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
718
8.A.3 due to large uncertainties. The metric estimates for NOX reflect 
the level of knowledge, but they also depend on experimental design, 
treatment of transport processes, and modelling of background levels. 
The multi-model study by Fry et al. (2012) shows the gaseous chemistry 
response to NOX is relatively robust for European emissions, but that 
the uncertainty is so large that for some regions of emissions it is not 
possible to conclude whether NOX causes cooling or warming.
8.7.2.2.2	
Carbon monoxide and volatile organic compounds
Emissions of carbon monoxide (CO) and volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) lead to production of ozone on short time scales. By affecting 
OH and thereby the levels of CH4 they also initiate a positive long-term 
ozone effect. With its lifetime of 2 to 3 months, the effect of CO emis­
sions is less dependent on location than is the case for NOX (see Table 
8.A.4). There is also less variation across models. However, Collins et 
al. (2010) found that inclusion of vegetation effects of O3 increased the 
GTP values for CO by 20 to 50%. By including aerosol responses Shin­
dell et al. (2009) found an increase in GWP100 by a factor of ~2.5. CO of 
fossil origin will also have a forcing effect by contributing to CO2 levels. 
This effect adds 1.4 to 1.6 to the GWP100 for CO (Daniel and Solomon, 
1998; Derwent et al., 2001). (The vegetation and aerosol effects are not 
included in the numbers in Table 8.A.4.)
VOC is not a well-defined group of hydrocarbons. This group of gases 
with different lifetimes is treated differently across models by lump­
ing or using representative key species. However, the spread in metric 
values in Table 8.A.5 is moderate across regions, with highest values 
for emissions in South Asia (of the four regions studied). The effects 
via ozone and CH4 cause warming, and the additional effects via inter­
actions with aerosols and via the O3–CO2 link increase the warming 
effect further. Thus, the net effects of CO and VOC are less uncertain 
than for NOX for which the net is a residual between larger terms of 
opposite sign. However, the formation of SOAs is usually not included 
in metric calculations for VOC, which introduces a cooling effect and 
increased uncertainty.
8.7.2.2.3	
Black carbon and organic carbon
Most of the metric values for BC in the literature include the aero­
sol–radiation interaction and the snow/ice albedo effect of BC, though 
whether external or internal mixing is used varies between the studies. 
Bond et al. (2011) calculate GWPs and find that when the albedo effect 
is included the values increase by 5 to 15%. Studies have shown, how­
ever, that the climate response per unit forcing to this mechanism is 
stronger than for WMGHG (see Section 7.5).
Bond et al. (2013) assessed the current understanding of BC effects 
and calculated GWP and GTP for BC that includes aerosol–radiation 
interaction, aerosol–cloud interactions and albedo. As shown in Table 
8.A.6 the uncertainties are wide for both metrics (for 90% uncertain­
ty range) reflecting the current challenges related to understanding 
and quantifying the various effects (see Sections 7.5, 8.3.4 and 8.5.1). 
Their aerosol–radiation interaction effect is about 65% of the total 
effect while the albedo effect is approximately 20% of the aerosol–
radiation interaction effect. Based on two studies (Rypdal et al., 2009; 
Bond et al., 2011), the GWP and GTP metrics were found to vary with 
the region where BC is emitted by about ±30% . For larger regions 
of emissions, Collins et al. (2013) calculated GWPs and GTPs for the 
direct effect of BC and found somewhat lower variations among the 
regions.
Several studies have focused on the effects of emissions of BC and 
OC from different regions (Bauer et al., 2007; Koch et al., 2007; Naik 
et al., 2007; Reddy and Boucher, 2007; Rypdal et al., 2009). However, 
examination of results from these models (Fuglestvedt et al., 2010) 
reveals that there is not a robust relationship between the region of 
emission and the metric value — hence, regions that yield the highest 
metric value in one study, do not, in general, do so in the other studies.
The metric values for OC are quite consistent across studies, but fewer 
studies are available (see Table 8.A.6). A brief overview of metric 
values for other components is given in the Supplementary Material 
Section 8.SM.14.
8.7.2.2.4	
Summary of status of metrics for near-term climate forcers
The metrics provide a format for comparing the magnitudes of the 
various emissions as well as for comparing effects of emissions from 
different regions. They can also be used for comparing results from 
different studies. Much of the spread in results is due to differences in 
experimental design and how the models treat physical and chemical 
processes. Unlike most of the WMGHGs, many of the NTCFs are tightly 
coupled to the hydrologic cycle and atmospheric chemistry, leading to 
a much larger spread in results as these are highly complex processes 
that are difficult to validate on the requisite small spatial and short 
temporal scales. The confidence level is lower for many of the NTCF 
compared to WMGHG and much lower where aerosol–cloud interac­
tions are important (see Section 8.5.1). There are particular difficulties 
for NOX, because the net impact is a small residual of opposing effects 
with quite different spatial distributions and temporal behaviour. 
Although climate–carbon feedbacks for non-CO2 emissions have not 
been included in the NTCF metrics (other than CH4) presented here, 
they can greatly increase those values (Collins et al., 2013) and likely 
provide more realistic results.
8.7.2.3	 Impact by Emitted Component
We now use the metrics evaluated here to estimate climate impacts 
of various components (in a forward looking perspective). Figure 8.32 
shows global anthropogenic emissions of some selected components 
weighted by the GWP and GTP. The time horizons are chosen as exam­
ples and illustrate how the perceived impacts of components—relative 
to the impact of the reference gas—vary strongly as function of impact 
parameter (integrated RF in GWP or end-point temperature in GTP) 
and with time horizon.
We may also calculate the temporal development of the temperature 
responses to pulse or sustained emissions using the AGTP metric. 
Figure 8.33 shows that for a one-year pulse the impacts of NTCF decay 
quickly owing to their atmospheric adjustment times even if effects are 
prolonged due to climate response time (in the case of constant emis­
sions the effects reach approximately constant levels since the emis­
sions are replenished each year, except for CO2, which has a ­fraction
=== PAGE 61 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
719
remaining in the atmosphere on time scales of centuries). Figure 8.33 
also shows how some components have strong short-lived effects of 
both signs while CO2 has a weaker initial effect but one that persists 
to create a long-lived warming effect. Note that there are large uncer­
tainties related to the metric values (as discussed in Section 8.7.1.4); 
especially for the NTCFs.
These examples show that the outcome of comparisons of effects of 
emissions depends strongly on choice of time horizon and metric type. 
Such end-user choices will have a strong influence on the calculat­
ed contributions from NTCFs versus WMGHGs or non-CO2 versus CO2 
emissions. Thus, each specific analysis should use a design chosen in 
light of the context and questions being asked.
8.7.2.4	 Metrics and Impacts by Sector
While the emissions of WMGHGs vary strongly between sectors, the cli­
mate impacts of these gases are independent of sector. The latter is not 
the case for chemically active and short-lived components, due to the 
dependence of their impact on the emission location. Since most sectors 
have multiple co-emissions, and for NTCFs some of these are warm­
ing while others are cooling, the net impact of a given sector requires 
explicit calculations. Since AR4, there has been significant progress in 
the understanding and quantification of climate impacts of NTCFs from 
sectors such as transportation, power production and biomass burning 
(Berntsen and Fuglestvedt, 2008; Skeie et al., 2009; Stevenson and Der­
went, 2009; Lee et al., 2010; Unger et al., 2010; Dahlmann et al., 2011). 
Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.18 gives an overview of recent pub­
lished metric values for various components by sector.
The impact from sectors depends on choice of metric, time horizon, 
pulse versus sustained emissions and forward versus backward looking 
perspective (see Section 8.7.1 and Box 8.4). Unger et al. (2010) calcu­
lated RF for a set of components emitted from each sector. RF at chosen 
points in time (20 and 100 years) for sustained emissions was used by 
Unger et al. (2010) as the metric for comparison. This is ­comparable 
10 yrs
20 yrs
100 yrs
10 yrs
20 yrs
100 yrs
20
0
-20
5
10
0
-5
CO2 equivalent emissions (Pg CO2-eq)
CO2 equivalent emissions (PgC-eq)
GWP 
GTP 
NOX
CO
BC
OC
SO2
CO2
CH4
N2O
Figure 8.32 |  Global anthropogenic emissions weighted by GWP and GTP for chosen time horizons (aerosol–cloud interactions are not included). Emission data for 2008 are 
taken from the EDGAR database. For BC and OC emissions for 2005 are from Shindell et al. (2012a). The units are ‘CO2 equivalents’ which reflects equivalence only in the impact 
parameter of the chosen metric (integrated RF over the chosen time horizon for GWP; temperature change at the chosen point in time for GTP), given as Pg(CO2)eq (left axis) and 
given as PgCeq (right axis). There are large uncertainties related to the metric values and consequentially also to the calculated CO2 equivalents (see text).
Time Horizon (yr)
Temperature impact (10-3 K)
20
40
60
80
-20
-30
-10
0
0
10
20
Figure 8.33 |  Temperature response by component for total anthropogenic emissions 
for a 1-year pulse. Emission data for 2008 are taken from the EDGAR database and for 
BC and OC for 2005 from Shindell et al. (2012a). There are large uncertainties related 
to the AGTP values and consequentially also to the calculated temperature responses 
(see text).
to using integrated RF up to the chosen times for pulse emissions (as 
in GWPs). Such studies are relevant for policymaking that focuses on 
regulating the total activity of a sector or for understanding the con­
tribution from a sector to climate change. On the other hand, the fixed 
mix of emissions makes it less general and relevant for emission sce­
narios. Alternatively, one may adopt a component-by-component view 
which is relevant for policies directed towards specific components (or 
sets of components, as controlling an individual pollutant in isolation 
is usually not practical). But this view will not capture interactions and 
non-linearities within the suite of components emitted by most sectors. 
The effects of specific emission control technologies or policies or pro­
jected societal changes on the mix of emissions is probably the most 
relevant type of analysis, but there are an enormous number of possi­
ble actions and regional details that could be investigated. Henze et al. 
(2012) demonstrate a method for providing highly spatially resolved
=== PAGE 62 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
720
estimates of forcing per component, and caution that RF aggregated 
over regions or sectors may not represent the impacts of emissions 
changes on finer scales.
Metrics for individual land-based sectors are often similar to the global 
mean metric values (Shindell et al., 2008). In contrast, metrics for emis­
sions from aviation and shipping usually show large differences from 
global mean metric values (Table 8.A.3 versus Table 8.SM.18). Though 
there can sometimes be substantial variation in the impact of land-
based sectors across regions, and for a particular region even from one 
sector to another, variability between different land-based sources is 
generally smaller than between land, sea and air emissions.
NOx from aviation is one example where the metric type is especial­
ly important. GWP20 values are positive due to the strong response 
of short-lived ozone. Reported GWP100 and GTP100 values are of either 
sign, however, due to the differences in balance between the individ­
ual effects modelled. Even if the models agree on the net effect of 
NOX, the individual contributions can differ significantly, with large 
uncertainties stemming from the relative magnitudes of the CH4 and 
O3 responses (Myhre et al., 2011) and the background tropospheric 
concentrations of NOX (Holmes et al., 2011; Stevenson and Derwent, 
2009). Köhler et al. (2013), find strong regional sensitivity of ozone 
and CH4 to NOX particularly at cruise altitude. Generally, they find the 
strongest effects at low latitudes. For the aviation sector contrails and 
contrail induced cirrus are also important. Based on detailed studies 
in the literature, Fuglestvedt et al. (2010) produced GWP and GTP for 
contrails, water vapor and contrail-induced cirrus.
The GWP and GTPs for NOX from shipping are strongly negative for 
all time horizons. The strong positive effect via O3 due to the low-NOX 
environment into which ships generally emit NOX is outweighed by the 
stronger effect on CH4 destruction due to the relatively lower latitudes 
of these emissions compared to land-based sources.
In addition to having large emissions of NOX the shipping sector has 
large emission of SO2. The direct GWP100 for shipping ranges from –11 
to –43 (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.18). Lauer et al. (2007) 
reported detailed calculations of the indirect forcing specifically for this 
sector and found a wide spread of values depending on the emission 
inventory. Righi et al. (2011) and Peters et al. (2012) calculate indirect 
effects that are 30 to 50% lower than the indirect forcing reported by 
Lauer et al. (2007). The values from Shindell and Faluvegi (2010) for 
SO2 from power generation are similar to those for shipping.
Although the various land transport sectors often are treated as one 
aggregate (e.g., road transport) there are important subdivisions. For 
instance, Bond et al. (2013) points out that among the BC-rich sec­
tors they examined, diesel vehicles have the most clearly positive net 
impact on forcing. Studies delving even further have shown substantial 
differences between trucks and cars, gasoline and diesel vehicles, and 
low-sulphur versus high-sulphur fuels. Similarly, for power production 
there are important differences depending on fuel type (coal, oil, gas; 
e.g., Shindell and Faluvegi, 2010).
In the assessment of climate impacts of current emissions by sectors 
we give examples and apply a forward-looking perspective on effects 
in terms of temperature change. The AGTP concept can be used to 
study the effects of the various components for chosen time horizons. 
A single year’s worth of current global emissions from the energy and 
industrial sectors have the largest contributions to warming after 100 
years (see Figure 8.34a). Household fossil fuel and biofuel, biomass 
burning and on-road transportation are also relatively large contribu­
tors to warming over 100-year time scales. Those same sectors, along 
with sectors that emit large amounts of CH4 (animal husbandry, waste/
landfills and agriculture), are most important over shorter time hori­
zons (about 20 years; see Figure 8.34b).
Analysing climate change impacts by using the net effect of particular 
activities or sectors may—compared to other perspectives—provide 
more insight into how societal actions influence climate. Owing to 
large variations in mix of short- and long-lived components, as well 
as cooling and warming effects, the results will also in these cases 
depend strongly on choice of time horizon and climate impact param­
eter. Improved understanding of aerosol–cloud interactions, and how 
those are attributed to individual components is clearly necessary to 
refine estimates of sectoral or emitted component impacts.
(     )
(     )
Figure 8.34 | Net global mean temperature change by source sector after (a) 100 
and (b) 20 years (for 1-year pulse emissions). Emission data for 2008 are taken from 
the EDGAR database. For BC and OC anthropogenic emissions are from Shindell et al. 
(2012a) and biomass burning emissions are from Lamarque et al. (2010), see Supple­
mentary Material Section 8.SM.17. There are large uncertainties related to the AGTP 
values and consequentially also to the calculated temperature responses (see text).
(a)
(b)
=== PAGE 63 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
721
References
Aaheim, A., J. Fuglestvedt, and O. Godal, 2006: Costs savings of a flexible multi-gas 
climate policy. Energy J. (Special Issue No. 3), 485–501.
Abreu, J., J. Beer, F. Steinhilber, S. Tobias, and N. Weiss, 2008: For how long will the 
current grand maximum of solar activity persist? Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L20109.
Ackerley, D., B. B. B. Booth, S. H. E. Knight, E. J. Highwood, D. J. Frame, M. R. Allen, 
and D. P. Rowell, 2011: Sensitivity of twentieth-century Sahel rainfall to sulfate 
aerosol and CO2 forcing. J. Clim., 24, 4999–5014.
Allan, W., H. Struthers, and D. C. Lowe, 2007: Methane carbon isotope effects 
caused by atomic chlorine in the marine boundary layer: Global model results 
compared with Southern Hemisphere measurements. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
112, D04306.
Ammann, C. M., and P. Naveau, 2003: Statistical analysis of tropical explosive 
volcanism occurrences over the last 6 centuries. Geophys. Res. Lett., 30, 1210.
Ammann, C. M., and P. Naveau, 2010: A statistical volcanic forcing scenario 
generator for climate simulations. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D05107.
Anchukaitis, K. J., B. M. Buckley, E. R. Cook, B. I. Cook, R. D. D’Arrigo, and C. M. 
Ammann, 2010: Influence of volcanic eruptions on the climate of the Asian 
monsoon region. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L22703.
Andersen, M., D. Blake, F. Rowland, M. Hurley, and T. Wallington, 2009: Atmospheric 
chemistry of sulfuryl fluoride: Reaction with OH radicals, CI atoms and O3, 
atmospheric lifetime, IR spectrum, and global warming potential. Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 43, 1067–1070.
Andersen, M., V. Andersen, O. Nielsen, S. Sander, and T. Wallington, 2010: Atmospheric 
chemistry of HCF2O(CF2CF2O)(x)CF2H (x=2–4): Kinetics and mechanisms of the 
chlorine-atom-initiated oxidation. Chemphyschem, 11, 4035–4041.
Andrews, T., and P. M. Forster, 2008: CO2 forcing induces semi-direct effects with 
consequences for climate feedback interpretations. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, 
L04802.
Andrews, T., M. Doutriaux-Boucher, O. Boucher, and P. M. Forster, 2011: A regional 
and global analysis of carbon dioxide physiological forcing and its impact on 
climate. Clim. Dyn., 36, 783–792.
Andrews, T., J. Gregory, M. Webb, and K. Taylor, 2012a: Forcing, feedbacks and climate 
sensitivity in CMIP5 coupled atmosphere-ocean climate models. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 39, L09712.
Andrews, T., P. Forster, O. Boucher, N. Bellouin, and A. Jones, 2010: Precipitation, 
radiative forcing and global temperature change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, 
doi:10.1029/2010GL043991, L14701.
Andrews, T., M. Ringer, M. Doutriaux-Boucher, M. Webb, and W. Collins, 2012b: 
Sensitivity of an Earth system climate model to idealized radiative forcing. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L10702.
Antuña, J. C., A. Robock, G. Stenchikov, J. Zhou, C. David, J. Barnes, and L. Thomason, 
2003: Spatial and temporal variability of the stratospheric aerosol cloud 
produced by the 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 108, 
4624.
Archibald, A. T., M. E. Jenkin, and D. E. Shallcross, 2010: An isoprene mechanism 
intercomparison. Atmos. Environ., 44, 5356–5364.
Archibald, A. T., et al., 2011: Impacts of HO(x) regeneration and recycling in the 
oxidation of isoprene: Consequences for the composition of past, present and 
future atmospheres. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, L05804.
Arnold, T., et al., 2013: Nitrogen trifluoride global emissions estimated from updated 
atmospheric measurements, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A, 110, 2029-2034.
Arora, V. K., and A. Montenegro, 2011: Small temperature benefits provided by 
realistic afforestation efforts. Nature Geosci., 4, 514–518.
Arora, V. K., et al., 2013: Carbon-concentration and carbon-climate feedbacks in 
CMIP5 Earth system models. J. Clim., 26, 5289-5314.
Ashmore, M. R., 2005: Assessing the future global impacts of ozone on vegetation. 
Plant Cell Environ., 28, 949–964.
Azar, C., and D. J. A. Johansson, 2012: On the relationship between metrics to 
compare greenhouse gases—the case of IGTP, GWP and SGTP. Earth Syst. 
Dynam., 3, 139–147.
Baasandorj, M., A. R. Ravishankara, and J. B. Burkholder, 2011: Atmospheric 
chemistry of (Z)-CF3CH=CHCF3: OH radical reaction rate coefficient and global 
warming potential. J. Phys. Chem. A, 115, 10539–10549.
Baasandorj, M., G. Knight, V. Papadimitriou, R. Talukdar, A. Ravishankara, and J. 
Burkholder, 2010: Rate coefficients for the gas-phase reaction of the hydroxyl 
radical with CH2 = CHF and CH2 = CF2. J. Phys. Chem. A, 114, 4619–4633.
Bala, G., K. Caldeira, M. Wickett, T. J. Phillips, D. B. Lobell, C. Delire, and A. Mirin, 2007: 
Combined climate and carbon-cycle effects of large-scale deforestation. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 104, 6550–6555.
Baliunas, S., and R. Jastrow, 1990: Evidence for long-term brightness changes of 
solar-type stars. Nature, 348, 520–523.
Ball, W., Y. Unruh, N. Krivova, S. Solanki, T. Wenzler, D. Mortlock, and A. Jaffe, 2012: 
Reconstruction of total solar irradiance 1974–2009. Astron. Astrophys., 541, 
A27.
Ban-Weiss, G., L. Cao, G. Bala, and K. Caldeira, 2012: Dependence of climate forcing 
and response on the altitude of black carbon aerosols. Clim. Dyn., 38, 897–911.
Barnes, C. A., and D. P. Roy, 2008: Radiative forcing over the conterminous United 
States due to contemporary land cover land use albedo change. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 35, L09706.
Bathiany, S., M. Claussen, V. Brovkin, T. Raddatz, and V. Gayler, 2010: Combined 
biogeophysical and biogeochemical effects of large-scale forest cover changes 
in the MPI earth system model. Biogeosciences, 7, 1383–1399.
Bauer, S., D. Koch, N. Unger, S. Metzger, D. Shindell, and D. Streets, 2007: Nitrate 
aerosols today and in 2030: A global simulation including aerosols and 
tropospheric ozone. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7, 5043–5059.
Bekki, S., J. A. Pyle, W. Zhong, R. Toumi, J. D. Haigh, and D. M. Pyle, 1996: The role of 
microphysical and chemical processes in prolonging the climate forcing of the 
Toba eruption. Geophys. Res. Lett., 23, 2669–2672.
Bellouin, N., J. Rae, A. Jones, C. Johnson, J. Haywood, and O. Boucher, 2011: Aerosol 
forcing in the Climate Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) simulations by 
HadGEM2–ES and the role of ammonium nitrate. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, 
D20206.
Bernier, P. Y., R. L. Desjardins, Y. Karimi-Zindashty, D. Worth, A. Beaudoin, Y. Luo, and S. 
Wang, 2011: Boreal lichen woodlands: A possible negative feedback to climate 
change in eastern North America. Agr. Forest Meteorol., 151, 521–528.
Berntsen, T., and J. Fuglestvedt, 2008: Global temperature responses to current 
emissions from the transport sectors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 105, 19154–
19159.
Berntsen, T. K., et al., 1997: Effects of anthropogenic emissions on tropospheric 
ozone and its radiative forcing. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 102, 28101–28126.
Betts, R., 2000: Offset of the potential carbon sink from boreal forestation by 
decreases in surface albedo. Nature, 408, 187–190.
Betts, R. A., P. D. Falloon, K. K. Goldewijk, and N. Ramankutty, 2007: Biogeophysical 
effects of land use on climate: Model simulations of radiative forcing and large-
scale temperature change. Agr. Forest Meteorol., 142, 216–233.
Biasutti, M., and A. Giannini, 2006: Robust Sahel drying in response to late 20th 
century forcings. Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L11706.
Blowers, P., K. F. Tetrault, and Y. Trujillo-Morehead, 2008: Global warming potential 
predictions for hydrofluoroethers with two carbon atoms. Theor. Chem. Acc., 
119, 369–381.
Blowers, P., D. Moline, K. Tetrault, R. Wheeler, and S. Tuchawena, 2007: Prediction of 
radiative forcing values for hydrofluoroethers using density functional theory 
methods. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 112, D15108.
Boer, G. J., and B. Yu, 2003: Climate sensitivity and response. Clim. Dyn., 20, 415–429.
Bollasina, M. A., Y. Ming, and V. Ramaswamy, 2011: Anthropogenic aerosols and the 
weakening of the South Asian summer monsoon. Science, 334, 502–505.
Bond, T., C. Zarzycki, M. Flanner, and D. Koch, 2011: Quantifying immediate radiative 
forcing by black carbon and organic matter with the Specific Forcing Pulse. 
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 1505–1525.
Bond, T. C., et al., 2007: Historical emissions of black and organic carbon aerosol 
from energy-related combustion, 1850–2000. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 21, 
Gb2018.
Bond, T. C., et al., 2013: Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: 
A scientific assessment. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50171, 
5380-5552.
Bonfils, C., and D. Lobell, 2007: Empirical evidence for a recent slowdown in 
irrigation-induced cooling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 104, 13582–13587.
Bonfils, C. J. W., T. J. Phillips, D. M. Lawrence, P. Cameron-Smith, W. J. Riley, and Z. M. 
Subin, 2012: On the influence of shrub height and expansion on northern high 
latitude climate. Environ. Res. Lett., 7, 015503.
=== PAGE 64 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
722
Booth, B., N. Dunstone, P. Halloran, T. Andrews, and N. Bellouin, 2012: Aerosols 
implicated as a prime driver of twentieth-century North Atlantic climate 
variability. Nature, 485, 534–534.
Boucher, O., 2012: Comparison of physically- and economically-based CO2–
equivalences for methane. Earth Syst. Dyn., 3, 49–61.
Boucher, O., and J. Haywood, 2001: On summing the components of radiative forcing 
of climate change. Clim. Dyn., 18, 297–302.
Boucher, O., and M. Reddy, 2008: Climate trade-off between black carbon and 
carbon dioxide emissions. Energy Policy, 36, 193–200.
Boucher, O., P. Friedlingstein, B. Collins, and K. P. Shine, 2009: The indirect global 
warming potential and global temperature change potential due to methane 
oxidation. Environ. Res. Lett., 4, 044007.
Bourassa, A. E., et al., 2012: Large volcanic aerosol load in the stratosphere linked to 
Asian monsoon transport. Science, 337, 78–81.
Bourassa, A. E., et al., 2013: Response to Comments on “Large Volcanic Aerosol Load 
in the Stratosphere Linked to Asian Monsoon Transport”. Science, 339, 6120.
Bowman, D., et al., 2009: Fire in the Earth System. Science, 324, 481–484.
Bowman, K. W., et al., 2013: Evaluation of ACCMIP outgoing longwave radiation 
from tropospheric ozone using TES satellite observations. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 
13, 4057–4072.
Bradford, D., 2001: Global change – Time, money and tradeoffs. Nature, 410, 649–
650.
Bravo, I., et al., 2010: Infrared absorption spectra, radiative efficiencies, and global 
warming potentials of perfluorocarbons: Comparison between experiment and 
theory. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D24317.
Brovkin, V., et al., 2010: Sensitivity of a coupled climate-carbon cycle model to large 
volcanic eruptions during the last millennium. Tellus B, 62, 674–681.
Calvin, K., et al., 2012: The role of Asia in mitigating climate change: Results from the 
Asia modeling exercise. Energ. Econ., 34, S251–S260.
Campra, P., M. Garcia, Y. Canton, and A. Palacios-Orueta, 2008: Surface temperature 
cooling trends and negative radiative forcing due to land use change toward 
greenhouse farming in southeastern Spain. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 113, 
D18109.
Carlton, A. G., R. W. Pinder, P. V. Bhave, and G. A. Pouliot, 2010: To what extent can 
biogenic SOA be controlled? Environ. Sci. Technol., 44, 3376–3380.
Carslaw, K. S., O. Boucher, D. V. Spracklen, G. W. Mann, J. G. L. Rae, S. Woodward, and 
M. Kulmala, 2010: A review of natural aerosol interactions and feedbacks within 
the Earth system. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 1701–1737.
Chang, W. Y., H. Liao, and H. J. Wang, 2009: Climate responses to direct radiative 
forcing of anthropogenic aerosols, tropospheric ozone, and long-lived 
greenhouse gases in Eastern China over 1951–2000. Adv. Atmos. Sci., 26, 748–
762.
Chen, W. T., A. Nenes, H. Liao, P. J. Adams, J. L. F. Li, and J. H. Seinfeld, 2010: Global 
climate response to anthropogenic aerosol indirect effects: Present day and year 
2100. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D12207.
Cherubini, F., G. Guest, and A. Strømman, 2012: Application of probablity distributions 
to the modelleing of biogenic CO2 fluxes in life cycle assessment. Global Change 
Biol. , 4, doi:10.1111/j.1757–1707.2011.01156.x, 784-798.
Cherubini, F., G. Peters, T. Berntsen, A. Stromman, and E. Hertwich, 2011: CO2 
emissions from biomass combustion for bioenergy: Atmospheric decay and 
contribution to global warming. Global Change Biol. Bioenerg., 3, 413–426.
Chung, C. E., and V. Ramanathan, 2006: Weakening of North Indian SST gradients 
and the monsoon rainfall in India and the Sahel. J. Clim., 19, 2036–2045.
Clark, H. L., M. L. Cathala, H. Teyssedre, J. P. Cammas, and V. H. Peuch, 2007: Cross-
tropopause fluxes of ozone using assimilation of MOZAIC observations in a 
global CTM. Tellus B, 59, 39–49.
Clarke, A. D., and K. J. Noone, 1985: Soot in the Arctic Snowpack—A cause for 
peturbations in radiative-transfer. Atmos. Environ., 19, 2045–2053.
Claussen, M., V. Brovkin, and A. Ganopolski, 2001: Biogeophysical versus 
biogeochemical feedbacks of large-scale land cover change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
28, 1011–1014.
Cofala, J., M. Amann, Z. Klimont, K. Kupiainen, and L. Hoglund-Isaksson, 2007: 
Scenarios of global anthropogenic emissions of air pollutants and methane until 
2030. Atmos. Environ., 41, 8486–8499.
Collins, W., R. Derwent, C. Johnson, and D. Stevenson, 2002: The oxidation of organic 
compounds in the troposphere and their global warming potentials. Clim. 
Change, 52, 453–479.
Collins, W. D., et al., 2006: Radiative forcing by well-mixed greenhouse gases: 
Estimates from climate models in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report (AR4). J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 111, 
D14317.
Collins, W. J., S. Sitch, and O. Boucher, 2010: How vegetation impacts affect climate 
metrics for ozone precursors. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D23308.
Collins, W. J., M. M. Fry, H. Yu, J. S. Fuglestvedt, D. T. Shindell, and J. J. West, 2013: 
Global and regional temperature-change potentials for near-term climate 
forcers. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2471–2485.
Conley, A. J., J. F. Lamarque, F. Vitt, W. D. Collins, and J. Kiehl, 2013: PORT, a CESM tool 
for the diagnosis of radiative forcing. Geosci. Model Dev., 6, 469–476.
Cooper, O. R., et al., 2010: Increasing springtime ozone mixing ratios in the free 
troposphere over western North America. Nature, 463, 344–348.
Cox, P. M., et al., 2008: Increasing risk of Amazonian drought due to decreasing 
aerosol pollution. Nature, 453, 212–215.
Crook, J., and P. Forster, 2011: A balance between radiative forcing and climate 
feedback in the modeled 20th century temperature response. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 116, D17108.
Crowley, T. J., and M. B. Unterman, 2013: Technical details concerning development 
of a 1200 yr proxy index for global volcanism. Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 5, 187-197.
Crutzen, P., 1973: Discussion of chemistry of some minor constituents in stratosphere 
and troposhere. Pure Appl. Geophys., 106, 1385–1399.
Dahlmann, K., V. Grewe, M. Ponater, and S. Matthes, 2011: Quantifying the 
contributions of individual NOx sources to the trend in ozone radiative forcing. 
Atmos. Environ., 45, 2860–2868.
Daniel, J., and S. Solomon, 1998: On the climate forcing of carbon monoxide. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 103, 13249–13260.
Daniel, J., S. Solomon, and D. Abritton, 1995: On the evaluation of halocarbon 
radiative forcing and global warming potentials. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 100, 
1271–1285.
Daniel, J., E. Fleming, R. Portmann, G. Velders, C. Jackman, and A. Ravishankara, 
2010: Options to accelerate ozone recovery: Ozone and climate benefits. Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 10, 7697–7707.
Daniel, J., S. Solomon, T. Sanford, M. McFarland, J. Fuglestvedt, and P. Friedlingstein, 
2012: Limitations of single-basket trading: Lessons from the Montreal Protocol 
for climate policy. Clim. Change, 111, 241–248.
Davin, E., N. de Noblet-Ducoudre, and P. Friedlingstein, 2007: Impact of land cover 
change on surface climate: Relevance of the radiative forcing concept. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 34, L13702.
Davin, E. L., and N. de Noblet-Ducoudre, 2010: Climatic impact of global-scale 
deforestation: Radiative versus nonradiative orocesses. J. Clim., 23, 97–112.
De Cara, S., E. Galko, and P. Jayet, 2008: The global warming potential paradox: 
Implications for the design of climate policy. In: Design of Climate Policy [R. 
Guesnerie and H. Tulkens (eds.)]. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, pp. 359–
384.
de la Torre, L., et al., 2006: Solar influence on Northern Annular Mode spatial 
structure and QBO modulation.  Part. Accel. Space Plasma Phys. Sol. Radiat. 
Earth. Atmos. Clim., 37, 1635–1639.
de Noblet-Ducoudre, N., et al., 2012: Determining robust impacts of land-use-
induced land cover changes on surface climate over North America and Eurasia: 
Results from the first set of LUCID experiments. J. Clim., 25, 3261–3281.
DeAngelis, A., F. Dominguez, Y. Fan, A. Robock, M. D. Kustu, and D. Robinson, 2010: 
Evidence of enhanced precipitation due to irrigation over the Great Plains of the 
United States. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D15115.
DeLand, M., and R. Cebula, 2012: Solar UV variations during the decline of Cycle 23. 
J. Atmos. Sol. Terres. Phys., 77, 225–234.
Delaygue, G., and E. Bard, 2011: An Antarctic view of Beryllium-10 and solar activity 
for the past millennium. Clim. Dyn., 36, 2201–2218.
Deligne, N. I., S. G. Coles, and R. S. J. Sparks, 2010: Recurrence rates of large explosive 
volcanic eruptions. J. Geophys. Res. Sol. Earth, 115, B06203.
den Elzen, M., et al., 2005: Analysing countries’ contribution to climate change: 
Scientific and policy-related choices. Environ. Sci. Policy, 8, 614–636.
Denman, K. L., et al., 2007: Couplings between changes in the climate system 
and biogeochemistry. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, 
Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H. L. Miller (eds.)] Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 499-587.
=== PAGE 65 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
723
Dentener, F., et al., 2006: The global atmospheric environment for the next 
generation. Environ. Sci. Technol., 40, 3586–3594.
Derwent, R., W. Collins, C. Johnson, and D. Stevenson, 2001: Transient behaviour of 
tropospheric ozone precursors in a global 3-D CTM and their indirect greenhouse 
effects. Clim. Change, 49, 463–487.
Deuber, O., G. Luderer, and O. Edenhofer, 2013: Physico-economic evaluation of 
climate metrics: A conceptual framework. Environ. Sci. Policy, 29, 37–45.
Dewitte, S., D. Crommelynck, S. Mekaoui, and A. Joukoff, 2004: Measurement and 
uncertainty of the long-term total solar irradiance trend. Solar Phys., 224, 209–
216.
Dickinson, R., 1975: Solar variability and lower atmosphere. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 
56, 1240–1248.
Doherty, S. J., S. G. Warren, T. C. Grenfell, A. D. Clarke, and R. E. Brandt, 2010: Light-
absorbing impurities in Arctic snow. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 11647–11680.
Doutriaux-Boucher, M., M. Webb, J. Gregory, and O. Boucher, 2009: Carbon dioxide 
induced stomatal closure increases radiative forcing via a rapid reduction in low 
cloud. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, doi:10.1029/2008GL036273, L02703.
Ehhalt, D. H., and L. E. Heidt, 1973: Vertical profiles of CH4 in troposphere and 
stratosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 78, 5265–5271.
Eliseev, A. V., and I.I. Mokhov, 2011: Effect of including land-use driven radiative 
forcing of the surface albedo of land on climate response in the 16th-21st 
centuries. Izvestiya Atmos. Ocean. Phys., 47, 15–30.
Engel, A., et al., 2009: Age of stratospheric air unchanged within uncertainties over 
the past 30 years. Nature Geosci., 2, 28–31.
Erlykin, A., and A. Wolfendale, 2011: Cosmic ray effects on cloud cover and their 
relevance to climate change. J. Atmos. Sol. Terres. Phys., 73, 1681–1686.
Ermolli, I., K. Matthes, T. Dudok de Wit, N. A. Krivova, K. Tourpali, M. Weber, Y. C. 
Unruh, L. Gray, U. Langematz, P. Pilewskie, E. Rozanov, W. Schmutz, A. Shapiro, 
S. K. Solanki, and T. N. Woods, 2013: Recent variability of the solar spectral 
irradiance and its impact on climate modelling, Atmospheric Chemistry and 
Physics, 13, 3945-3977.
Esper, J., and F. H. Schweingruber, 2004: Large-scale treeline changes recorded in 
Siberia. Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L06202.
Eyring, V., et al., 2010a: Sensitivity of 21st century stratospheric ozone to greenhouse 
gas scenarios. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L16807.
Eyring, V., et al., 2010b: Multi-model assessment of stratospheric ozone return dates 
and ozone recovery in CCMVal-2 models. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 9451–9472.
Fan, F. X., M. E. Mann, and C. M. Ammann, 2009: Understanding changes in the 
Asian summer monsoon over the past millennium: Insights from a long-term 
coupled model simulation. J. Clim., 22, 1736–1748.
FAO, 2012: State of the world’s forests. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, Rome, Italy, 60 pp.
Feng, X., and F. Zhao, 2009: Effect of changes of the HITRAN database on 
transmittance calculations in the near-infrared region. J. Quant. Spectrosc. 
Radiat. Transfer, 110, 247–255.
Feng, X., F. Zhao, and W. Gao, 2007: Effect of the improvement of the HITIRAN 
database on the radiative transfer calculation. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. 
Transfer, 108, 308–318.
Findell, K. L., E. Shevliakova, P. C. D. Milly, and R. J. Stouffer, 2007: Modeled impact of 
anthropogenic land cover change on climate. J. Clim., 20, 3621–3634.
Fioletov, V. E., G. E. Bodeker, A. J. Miller, R. D. McPeters, and R. Stolarski, 2002: Global 
and zonal total ozone variations estimated from ground-based and satellite 
measurements: 1964–2000. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 107, 4647.
Fiore, A. M., et al., 2009: Multimodel estimates of intercontinental source-receptor 
relationships for ozone pollution. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D04301.
Fischer, E. M., J. Luterbacher, E. Zorita, S. F. B. Tett, C. Casty, and H. Wanner, 2007: 
European climate response to tropical volcanic eruptions over the last half 
millennium. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L05707.
Fishman, J., et al., 2010: An investigation of widespread ozone damage to the 
soybean crop in the upper Midwest determined from ground-based and satellite 
measurements. Atmos. Environ., 44, 2248–2256.
Flanner, M. G., C. S. Zender, J. T. Randerson, and P. J. Rasch, 2007: Present-day climate 
forcing and response from black carbon in snow. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 112, 
D11202.
Fletcher, C. G., P. J. Kushner, A. Hall, and X. Qu, 2009: Circulation responses to snow 
albedo feedback in climate change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L09702.
Fomin, B. A., and V. A. Falaleeva, 2009: Recent progress in spectroscopy and its effect 
on line-by-line calculations for the validation of radiation codes for climate 
models. Atmos. Oceanic Opt., 22, 626–629.
Forster, P., and K. Shine, 1997: Radiative forcing and temperature trends from 
stratospheric ozone changes. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 102, 10841–10855.
Forster, P., et al., 2005: Resolution of the uncertainties in the radiative forcing of 
HFC-134a. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 93, 447–460.
Forster, P., et al., 2007: Changes in Atmospheric Constituents and in Radiative Forcing. 
In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working 
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B. 
Averyt, M. Tignor and H. L. Miller (eds.)] Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 129-234.
Forster, P., et al., 2011a: Evaluation of radiation scheme performance within 
chemistry climate models. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D10302.
Forster, P. M., T. Andrews, P. Good, J. M. Gregory, L. S. Jackson, and M. Zelinka, 2013: 
Evaluating adjusted forcing and model spread for historical and future scenarios 
in the CMIP5 generation of climate models. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118, 1139–
1150.
Forster, P. M., et al., 2011b: Stratospheric changes and climate. In: Scientific 
Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010. Global Ozone Research and 
Monitoring Project–Report  No. 52, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 516 pp.
Fortuin, J. P. F., and H. Kelder, 1998: An ozone climatology based on ozonesonde and 
satellite measurements. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 103, 31709–31734.
Foukal, P., and J. Lean, 1988: Magnetic modulation of solar luminosity by phtospheric 
activity. Astrophys. J., 328, 347–357.
Fowler, D., et al., 2009: Atmospheric composition change: Ecosystems-atmosphere 
interactions. Atmos. Environ., 43, 5193–5267.
Frame, T., and L. Gray, 2010: The 11-yr solar cycle in ERA-40 data: An update to 2008. 
J. Clim., 23, 2213–2222.
Freckleton, R., E. Highwood, K. Shine, O. Wild, K. Law, and M. Sanderson, 1998: 
Greenhouse gas radiative forcing: Effects of averaging and inhomogeneities in 
trace gas distribution. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 124, 2099–2127.
Friedlingstein, P., et al., 2006: Climate-carbon cycle feedback analysis: Results from 
the C(4)MIP model intercomparison. J. Clim., 19, 3337–3353.
Frohlich, C., 2006: Solar irradiance variability since 1978—Revision of the PMOD 
composite during solar cycle 21. Space Sci. Rev., 125, 53–65.
Frohlich, C., 2009: Evidence of a long-term trend in total solar irradiance. Astron. 
Astrophys., 501, L27–L30.
Frolicher, T. L., F. Joos, and C. C. Raible, 2011: Sensitivity of atmospheric CO2 and 
climate to explosive volcanic eruptions. Biogeosciences, 8, 2317–2339.
Fromm, M., G. Nedoluha, and Z. Charvat, 2013: Comment on “Large Volcanic 
Aerosol Load in the Stratosphere Linked to Asian Monsoon Transport”. Science, 
339, 647–c.
Fry, M., et al., 2012: The influence of ozone precursor emissions from four world 
regions on tropospheric composition and radiative climate forcing. J. Geophys. 
Res. Atmos., 117, D07306.
Fuglestvedt, J., T. Berntsen, O. Godal, and T. Skodvin, 2000: Climate implications of 
GWP-based reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 
409–412.
Fuglestvedt, J., T. Berntsen, O. Godal, R. Sausen, K. Shine, and T. Skodvin, 2003: 
Metrics of climate change: Assessing radiative forcing and emission indices. 
Clim. Change, 58, 267–331.
Fuglestvedt, J. S., et al., 2010: Transport impacts on atmosphere and climate: Metrics. 
Atmos. Environ., 44, 4648–4677.
Fung, I., J. John, J. Lerner, E. Matthews, M. Prather, L. P. Steele, and P. J. Fraser, 1991: 
3-Dimensional model synthesis of the global methane cycle. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 96, 13033–13065.
Gaillard, M. J., et al., 2010: Holocene land-cover reconstructions for studies on land 
cover-climate feedbacks. Clim. Past, 6, 483–499.
Gao, C. C., A. Robock, and C. Ammann, 2008: Volcanic forcing of climate over 
the past 1500 years: An improved ice core-based index for climate models. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 113, D23111.
Garcia, R. R., W. J. Randel, and D. E. Kinnison, 2011: On the determination of age of 
air trends from atmospheric trace species. J. Atmos. Sci., 68, 139–154.
Gerlach, T., 2011: Volcanic versus anthropogenic carbon dioxide. Eos, 92, 201–202.
Gettelman, A., J. Holton, and K. Rosenlof, 1997: Mass fluxes of O3, CH4, N2O and 
CF2Cl2 in the lower stratosphere calculated from observational data. J. Geophys. 
Res. Atmos., 102, 19149–19159.
=== PAGE 66 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
724
Gillett, N., and H. Matthews, 2010: Accounting for carbon cycle feedbacks in a 
comparison of the global warming effects of greenhouse gases. Environ. Res. 
Lett., 5, 034011.
Ginoux, P., D. Garbuzov, and N. C. Hsu, 2010: Identification of anthropogenic and 
natural dust sources using Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) Deep Blue level 2 data. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D05204.
Godal, O., and J. Fuglestvedt, 2002: Testing 100-year global warming potentials: 
Impacts on compliance costs and abatement profile. Clim. Change, 52, 93–127.
Goosse, H., et al., 2006: The origin of the European “Medieval Warm Period”. Clim. 
Past, 2, 99–113.
Granier, C., et al., 2011: Evolution of anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions 
of air pollutants at global and regional scales during the 1980–2010 period. 
Clim. Change, 109, 163–190.
Gray, L., S. Rumbold, and K. Shine, 2009: Stratospheric temperature and radiative 
forcing response to 11-year solar cycle changes in irradiance and ozone. J. 
Atmos. Sci., 66, 2402–2417.
Gray, L., et al., 2010: Solar influences on climate. Rev. Geophys., 48, RG4001.
Gregory, J., and M. Webb, 2008: Tropospheric adjustment induces a cloud component 
in CO2 forcing. J. Clim., 21, 58–71.
Gregory, J., et al., 2004: A new method for diagnosing radiative forcing and climate 
sensitivity. Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L03205.
Gregory, J. M., 2010: Long-term effect of volcanic forcing on ocean heat content. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L22701.
Grewe, V., 2007: Impact of climate variability on tropospheric ozone. Sci. Tot. 
Environ., 374, 167–181.
Gusev, A. A., 2008: Temporal structure of the global sequence of volcanic eruptions: 
Order clustering and intermittent discharge rate. Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 166, 
203–218.
Haigh, J., 1994: The role of stratospheric ozone in modulating the solar radiative 
forcing of climate. Nature, 370, 544–546.
Haigh, J., 1999: A GCM study of climate change in response to the 11-year solar 
cycle. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 125, 871–892.
Haigh, J. D., 1996: The impact of solar variability on climate. Science, 272, 981–984.
Hall, J., and G. Lockwood, 2004: The chromospheric activity and variability of cycling 
and flat activity solar-analog stars. Astrophys. J., 614, 942–946.
Hallquist, M., et al., 2009: The formation, properties and impact of secondary organic 
aerosol: Current and emerging issues. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 5155–5236.
Hammitt, J., A. Jain, J. Adams, and D. Wuebbles, 1996: A welfare-based index for 
assessing environmental effects of greenhouse-gas emissions. Nature, 381, 
301–303.
Hansen, J., and L. Nazarenko, 2004: Soot climate forcing via snow and ice albedos. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 101, 423–428.
Hansen, J., et al., 2005: Efficacy of climate forcings. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 110, 
D18104.
Hansen, J., et al., 2007: Climate simulations for 1880–2003 with GISS modelE. Clim. 
Dyn., 29, 661–696.
Harder, J., J. Fontenla, P. Pilewskie, E. Richard, and T. Woods, 2009: Trends in solar 
spectral irradiance variability in the visible and infrared. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
36, L07801.
Harrison, R., and M. Ambaum, 2010: Observing Forbush decreases in cloud at 
Shetland. J. Atmos. Sol. Terres. Phys., 72, 1408–1414.
Haywood, J., and M. Schulz, 2007: Causes of the reduction in uncertainty in the 
anthropogenic radiative forcing of climate between IPCC (2001) and IPCC 
(2007). Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L20701.
Haywood, J. M., et al., 2010: Observations of the eruption of the Sarychev volcano 
and simulations using the HadGEM2 climate model. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
115, D21212.
Heathfield, A., C. Anastasi, A. McCulloch, and F. Nicolaisen, 1998: Integrated infrared 
absorption coefficients of several partially fluorinated ether compounds: 
CF3OCF2H, CF2HOCF2H, CH3OCF2CF2H, CH3OCF2CFClH, CH3CH2OCF2CF2H, 
CF3CH2OCF2CF2H AND CH2=CHCH2OCF2CF2H. Atmos. Environ., 32, 2825–2833.
Hegg, D. A., S. G. Warren, T. C. Grenfell, S. J. Doherty, T. V. Larson, and A. D. Clarke, 
2009: Source attribution of black carbon in Arctic snow. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
43, 4016–4021.
Hegglin, M. I., and T. G. Shepherd, 2009: Large climate-induced changes in ultraviolet 
index and stratosphere-to-troposphere ozone flux. Nature Geosci., 2, 687–691.
Helama, S., M. Fauria, K. Mielikainen, M. Timonen, and M. Eronen, 2010: Sub-
Milankovitch solar forcing of past climates: Mid and late Holocene perspectives. 
Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 122, 1981–1988.
Henze, D. K., et al., 2012: Spatially refined aerosol direct radiative forcing efficiencies. 
Environ. Sci. Technol., 46, 9511–9518.
Hohne, N., et al., 2011: Contributions of individual countries’ emissions to climate 
change and their uncertainty. Clim. Change, 106, 359–391.
Holmes, C., Q. Tang, and M. Prather, 2011: Uncertainties in climate assessment for 
the case of aviation NO. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 108, 10997–11002.
Holmes, C. D., M. J. Prather, O. A. Sovde, and G. Myhre, 2013: Future methane, 
hydroxyl, and their uncertainties: Key climate and emission parameters for future 
predictions. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 285–302.
Horowitz, L. W., 2006: Past, present, and future concentrations of tropospheric ozone 
and aerosols: Methodology, ozone evaluation, and sensitivity to aerosol wet 
removal. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 111, D22211.
Houghton, J. T., G. J. Jenkins, and J. J. Ephraums (eds.), 1990: Climate Change. The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 364 pp.
Hoyle, C., et al., 2011: A review of the anthropogenic influence on biogenic secondary 
organic aerosol. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 321–343.
Hsu, J., and M. J. Prather, 2009: Stratospheric variability and tropospheric ozone. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D06102.
Huang, J., Q. Fu, W. Zhang, X. Wang, R. Zhang, H. Ye, and S. Warren, 2011: Dust and 
black carbon in seasonal snow across northern China. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 
92, 175–181.
Huijnen, V., et al., 2010: The global chemistry transport model TM5: Description and 
evaluation of the tropospheric chemistry version 3.0. Geosci. Model Dev., 3, 
445–473.
Hurst, D. F., et al., 2011: Stratospheric water vapor trends over Boulder, Colorado: 
Analysis of the 30 year Boulder record. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D02306.
Hurtt, G. C., et al., 2006: The underpinnings of land-use history: Three centuries 
of global gridded land-use transitions, wood-harvest activity, and resulting 
secondary lands. Global Change Biol., 12, 1208–1229.
Iacono, M. J., J. S. Delamere, E. J. Mlawer, M. W. Shephard, S. A. Clough, and W. D. 
Collins, 2008: Radiative forcing by long-lived greenhouse gases: Calculations 
with the AER radiative transfer models. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 113, D13103.
Ineson, S., A. A. Scaife, J. R. Knight, J. C. Manners, N. J. Dunstone, L. J. Gray, and 
J. D. Haigh, 2011: Solar forcing of winter climate variability in the Northern 
Hemisphere. Nature Geosci., 4, 753–757.
IPCC, 1996: Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change.
Isaksen, I., et al., 2009: Atmospheric composition change: Climate-chemistry 
interactions. Atmos. Environ., 43, 5138–5192.
Ito, A., and J. E. Penner, 2005: Historical emissions of carbonaceous aerosols from 
biomass and fossil fuel burning for the period 1870–2000. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 19, Gb2028.
Jackson, S., 2009: Parallel pursuit of near-term and long-term climate mitigation. 
Science, 326, 526–527.
Jacobson, M., 2010: Short-term effects of controlling fossil-fuel soot, biofuel soot 
and gases, and methane on climate, Arctic ice, and air pollution health. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D14209.
Jacobson, M., 2012: Investigating cloud absorption effects: Global absorption 
properties of black carbon, tar balls, and soil dust in clouds and aerosols. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 117, D06205.
Javadi, M., O. Nielsen, T. Wallington, M. Hurley, and J. Owens, 2007: Atmospheric 
chemistry 
of 
2-ethoxy-3,3,4,4,5–pentafluorotetra-hydro-2,5-bis[1,2,2,2-
tetrafluoro-1-(trifluoromethyl)ethyl]-furan: Kinetics, mechanisms, and products 
of CL atom and OH radical initiated oxidation. Environ. Sci. Technol., 41, 7389–
7395.
Jin, M. L., R. E. Dickinson, and D. L. Zhang, 2005: The footprint of urban areas on 
global climate as characterized by MODIS. J. Clim., 18, 1551–1565.
Jin, Y., and D. P. Roy, 2005: Fire-induced albedo change and its radiative forcing at 
the surface in northern Australia. Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L13401.
Jin, Y. F., J. T. Randerson, M. L. Goulden, and S. J. Goetz, 2012: Post-fire changes in 
net shortwave radiation along a latitudinal gradient in boreal North America. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L13403.
Johansson, D., 2012: Economics- and physical-based metrics for comparing 
greenhouse gases. Clim. Change, 110, 123–141.
Johansson, D., U. Persson, and C. Azar, 2006: The cost of using global warming 
potentials: Analysing the trade off between CO2, CH4 and N2O. Clim. Change, 77, 
doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9054-1, 291–309.
=== PAGE 67 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
725
Jones, G., M. Lockwood, and P. Stott, 2012: What influence will future solar 
activity changes over the 21st century have on projected global near-surface 
temperature changes? J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 117, D05103.
Jones, G. S., J. M. Gregory, P. A. Stott, S. F. B. Tett, and R. B. Thorpe, 2005: An AOGCM 
simulation of the climate response to a volcanic super-eruption. Clim. Dyn., 25, 
725–738.
Joos, F., M. Bruno, R. Fink, U. Siegenthaler, T. Stocker, and C. LeQuere, 1996: An 
efficient and accurate representation of complex oceanic and biospheric models 
of anthropogenic carbon uptake. Tellus B, 48, 397–417.
Joos, F., et al., 2013: Carbon dioxide and climate impulse response functions for the 
computation of greenhouse gas metrics: A multi-model analysis. Atmos. Chem. 
Phys., 13, 2793–2825.
Joshi, M., and J. Gregory, 2008: Dependence of the land-sea contrast in surface 
climate response on the nature of the forcing. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L24802.
Joshi, M. M., and G. S. Jones, 2009: The climatic effects of the direct injection of 
water vapour into the stratosphere by large volcanic eruptions. Atmos. Chem. 
Phys., 9, 6109–6118.
Kandlikar, M., 1995: The relative role of trace gas emissions in greenhouse abatement 
policies. Energ. Policy, 23, 879–883.
Kaplan, J. O., K. M. Krumhardt, E. C. Ellis, W. F. Ruddiman, C. Lemmen, and K. K. 
Goldewijk, 2011: Holocene carbon emissions as a result of anthropogenic land 
cover change. Holocene, 21, 775–791.
Kasischke, E. S., and J. E. Penner, 2004: Improving global estimates of atmospheric 
emissions from biomass burning. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 109, D14S01.
Kawase, H., T. Nagashima, K. Sudo, and T. Nozawa, 2011: Future changes in 
tropospheric ozone under Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, L05801.
Kawase, H., M. Abe, Y. Yamada, T. Takemura, T. Yokohata, and T. Nozawa, 2010: 
Physical mechanism of long-term drying trend over tropical North Africa. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L09706.
Kirkby, J., 2007: Cosmic rays and climate. Surv. Geophys., 28, 333–375.
Kirkby, J., et al., 2011: Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia and galactic cosmic rays in 
atmospheric aerosol nucleation. Nature, 476, 429–433.
Kleinman, L. I., P. H. Daum, Y. N. Lee, L. J. Nunnermacker, S. R. Springston, J. Weinstein-
Lloyd, and J. Rudolph, 2001: Sensitivity of ozone production rate to ozone 
precursors. Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 2903–2906.
Knutti, R., et al., 2008: A review of uncertainties in global temperature projections 
over the twenty-first century. J. Clim., 21, 2651–2663.
Koch, D., and A. D. Del Genio, 2010: Black carbon semi-direct effects on cloud cover: 
Review and synthesis. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 7685–7696.
Koch, D., T. Bond, D. Streets, N. Unger, and G. van der Werf, 2007: Global impacts 
of aerosols from particular source regions and sectors. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
112, D02205.
Koch, D., S. Menon, A. Del Genio, R. Ruedy, I. Alienov, and G. A. Schmidt, 2009a: 
Distinguishing aerosol impacts on climate over the past century. J. Clim., 22, 
2659–2677.
Koch, D., et al., 2011: Coupled aerosol-chemistry-climate twentieth-century transient 
model investigation: Trends in short-lived species and climate responses. J. Clim., 
24, 2693–2714.
Koch, D., et al., 2009b: Evaluation of black carbon estimations in global aerosol 
models. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 9001–9026.
Koehler, M. O., G. Raedel, K. P. Shine, H. L. Rogers, and J. A. Pyle, 2013: Latitudinal 
variation of the effect of aviation NOx emissions on atmospheric ozone and 
methane and related climate metrics. Atmos. Environ., 64, 1–9.
Koffi, B., et al., 2012: Application of the CALIOP layer product to evaluate the vertical 
distribution of aerosols estimated by global models: AeroCom phase I results. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 117, D10201.
Kopp, G., and J. Lean, 2011: A new, lower value of total solar irradiance: Evidence 
and climate significance. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, L01706.
Kratz, D., 2008: The sensitivity of radiative transfer calculations to the changes in 
the HITRAN database from 1982 to 2004. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 
109, 1060–1080.
Kravitz, B., and A. Robock, 2011: Climate effects of high-latitude volcanic eruptions: 
Role of the time of year. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D01105.
Kravitz, B., A. Robock, and A. Bourassa, 2010: Negligible climatic effects from the 
2008 Okmok and Kasatochi volcanic eruptions. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, 
D00L05.
Kravitz, B., et al., 2011: Simulation and observations of stratospheric aerosols from 
the 2009 Sarychev volcanic eruption. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D18211.
Kristjansson, J. E., T. Iversen, A. Kirkevag, O. Seland, and J. Debernard, 2005: 
Response of the climate system to aerosol direct and indirect forcing: Role of 
cloud feedbacks. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 110, D24206.
Krivova, N., L. Vieira, and S. Solanki, 2010: Reconstruction of solar spectral irradiance 
since the Maunder minimum. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys., 115, A12112.
Kueppers, L. M., M. A. Snyder, and L. C. Sloan, 2007: Irrigation cooling effect: 
Regional climate forcing by land-use change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L03703.
Kuroda, Y., and K. Kodera, 2005: Solar cycle modulation of the southern annular 
mode. Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L13802.
Kvalevag, M. M., G. Myhre, G. Bonan, and S. Levis, 2010: Anthropogenic land cover 
changes in a GCM with surface albedo changes based on MODIS data. Int. J. 
Climatol., 30, 2105–2117.
Lacis, A. A., D. J. Wuebbles, J. A. Logan, 1990: Radiative forcing of climate by changes 
in the vertical-distribution of ozone, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 9971-9981.
Lamarque, J., et al., 2011: Global and regional evolution of short-lived radiatively-
active gases and aerosols in the Representative Concentration Pathways. Clim. 
Change, 109, 191–212.
Lamarque, J., et al., 2010: Historical (1850–2000) gridded anthropogenic and 
biomass burning emissions of reactive gases and aerosols: Methodology and 
application. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 7017–7039.
Lamarque, J. F., et al., 2013: The Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model 
Intercomparison Project (ACCMIP): Overview and description of models, 
simulations and climate diagnostics. Geosci. Model Dev., 6, 179–206.
Lau, K. M., M. K. Kim, and K. M. Kim, 2006: Asian summer monsoon anomalies 
induced by aerosol direct forcing: The role of the Tibetan Plateau. Clim. Dyn., 
26, 855–864.
Lauder, A. R., I. G. Enting, J. O. Carter, N. Clisby, A. L. Cowie, B. K. Henry, and M. 
R. Raupach, 2013: Offsetting methane emissions—An alternative to emission 
equivalence metrics. Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control, 12, 419–429.
Lauer, A., V. Eyring, J. Hendricks, P. Jockel, and U. Lohmann, 2007: Global model 
simulations of the impact of ocean-going ships on aerosols, clouds, and the 
radiation budget. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7, 5061–5079.
Lawrence, P. J., and T. N. Chase, 2010: Investigating the climate impacts of global 
land cover change in the community climate system model. Int. J. Climatol., 30, 
2066–2087.
Lean, J., 2000: Evolution of the sun’s spectral irradiance since the Maunder Minimum. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 2425–2428.
Lean, J., and M. Deland, 2012: How does the sun’s spectrum vary? J. Clim., 25, 
2555–2560.
Lee, D. S., et al., 2010: Transport impacts on atmosphere and climate: Aviation. 
Atmos. Environ., 44, 4678–4734.
Lee, J., D. Shindell, and S. Hameed, 2009: The influence of solar forcing on tropical 
circulation. J. Clim., 22, 5870–5885.
Lee, R., M. Gibson, R. Wilson, and S. Thomas, 1995: Long-term total solar irradiance 
variability during sunspot cycle-22. J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys., 100, 1667–
1675.
Lee, X., et al., 2011: Observed increase in local cooling effect of deforestation at 
higher latitudes. Nature, 479, 384–387.
Lee, Y. H., et al., 2013: Evaluation of preindustrial to present-day black carbon and its 
albedo forcing from Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model Intercomparison 
Project (ACCMIP). Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2607–2634.
Legras, B., O. Mestre, E. Bard, and P. Yiou, 2010: A critical look at solar-climate 
relationships from long temperature series. Clim. Past, 6, 745–758.
Leibensperger, E. M., L. J. Mickley, and D. J. Jacob, 2008: Sensitivity of US air quality 
to mid-latitude cyclone frequency and implications of 1980–2006 climate 
change. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 7075–7086.
Leibensperger, E. M., et al., 2012a: Climatic effects of 1950–2050 changes in US 
anthropogenic aerosols—Part 1: Aerosol trends and radiative forcing. Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 12, 3333–3348.
Leibensperger, E. M., et al., 2012b: Climatic effects of 1950–2050 changes in US 
anthropogenic aerosols—Part 2: Climate response. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 
3349–3362.
Lelieveld, J., et al., 2008: Atmospheric oxidation capacity sustained by a tropical 
forest. Nature, 452, 737–740.
Levy, H., 1971: Normal atmosphere—Large radical and formaldehyde concentrations 
predicted. Science, 173, 141–143.
Liao, H., W. T. Chen, and J. H. Seinfeld, 2006: Role of climate change in global 
predictions of future tropospheric ozone and aerosols. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
111, D12304.
=== PAGE 68 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
726
Lockwood, M., 2010: Solar change and climate: An update in the light of the current 
exceptional solar minimum. Proc. R. Soc. London A, 466, 303–329.
Lockwood, M., and C. Frohlich, 2008: Recent oppositely directed trends in solar 
climate forcings and the global mean surface air temperature. II. Different 
reconstructions of the total solar irradiance variation and dependence on 
response time scale. Proc. R. Soc. London A, 464, 1367–1385.
Lockwood, M., A. Rouillard, and I. Finch, 2009: The rise and fall of open solar flux 
during the current grand solar maximum. Astrophys. J., 700, 937–944.
Logan, J. A., 1999: An analysis of ozonesonde data for the troposphere: 
Recommendations for testing 3-D models and development of a gridded 
climatology for tropospheric ozone. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 104, 16115–16149.
Logan, J. A., M. J. Prather, S. C. Wofsy, and M. B. McElroy, 1981: Tropospheric 
chemistry—A global perspective. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans Atmos., 86, 7210–
7254.
Logan, J. A., et al., 2012: Changes in ozone over Europe: Analysis of ozone 
measurements from sondes, regular aircraft (MOZAIC) and alpine surface sites. 
J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 117, D09301.
Lohila, A., et al., 2010: Forestation of boreal peatlands: Impacts of changing albedo 
and greenhouse gas fluxes on radiative forcing. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci., 115, 
G04011.
Lohmann, U., et al., 2010: Total aerosol effect: Radiative forcing or radiative flux 
perturbation? Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 3235–3246.
Long, C. N., E. G. Dutton, J. A. Augustine, W. Wiscombe, M. Wild, S. A. McFarlane, and 
C. J. Flynn, 2009: Significant decadal brightening of downwelling shortwave in 
the continental United States. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D00D06.
Long, D., and M. Collins, 2013: Quantifying global climate feedbacks, responses and 
forcing under abrupt and gradual CO2 forcing. Clim. Dyn., 41, 2471-2479.
Lu, P., H. Zhang, and X. Jing, 2012: The effects of different HITRAN versions on 
calculated long-wave radiation and uncertainty evaluation. Acta Meteorol. Sin., 
26, 389–398.
Lu, Z., Q. Zhang, and D. G. Streets, 2011: Sulfur dioxide and primary carbonaceous 
aerosol emissions in China and India, 1996–2010. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 
9839–9864.
Lund, M., T. Berntsen, J. Fuglestvedt, M. Ponater, and K. Shine, 2012: How much 
information is lost by using global-mean climate metrics? an example using the 
transport sector. Clim. Change, 113, 949–963.
MacFarling Meure, C., et al., 2006: Law Dome CO2, CH4 and N2O ice core records 
extended to 2000 years BP. Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L14810.
MacMynowski, D., H. Shin, and K. Caldeira, 2011: The frequency response of 
temperature and precipitation in a climate model. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, 
L16711.
Mader, J. A., J. Staehelin, T. Peter, D. Brunner, H. E. Rieder, and W. A. Stahel, 2010: 
Evidence for the effectiveness of the Montreal Protocol to protect the ozone 
layer. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 12161–12171.
Mahowald, N. M., et al., 2010: Observed 20th century desert dust variability: Impact 
on climate and biogeochemistry. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 10875–10893.
Mann, M., M. Cane, S. Zebiak, and A. Clement, 2005: Volcanic and solar forcing of 
the tropical Pacific over the past 1000 years. J. Clim., 18, 447–456.
Manne, A., and R. Richels, 2001: An alternative approach to establishing trade-offs 
among greenhouse gases. Nature, 410, 675–677.
Manning, M., and A. Reisinger, 2011: Broader perspectives for comparing different 
greenhouse gases. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London A, 369, 1891–1905.
Marenco, A., H. Gouget, P. Nedelec, J. P. Pages, and F. Karcher, 1994: Evidence of 
a long-term increase in troposheric ozone from PIC Du Midi Data Series—
Consequences—Positive radiative forcing. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 99, 16617–
16632.
Marten, A. L., and S. C. Newbold, 2012: Estimating the social cost of non-CO2 GHG 
emissions: Methane and nitrous oxide. Energ. Policy, 51, 957–972.
Matthews, H. D., A. J. Weaver, K. J. Meissner, N. P. Gillett, and M. Eby, 2004: Natural 
and anthropogenic climate change: Incorporating historical land cover change, 
vegetation dynamics and the global carbon cycle. Clim. Dyn., 22, 461–479.
McComas, D., R. Ebert, H. Elliott, B. Goldstein, J. Gosling, N. Schwadron, and R. 
Skoug, 2008: Weaker solar wind from the polar coronal holes and the whole 
Sun. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L18103.
McLandress, C., T. G. Shepherd, J. F. Scinocca, D. A. Plummer, M. Sigmond, A. I. 
Jonsson, and M. C. Reader, 2011: Separating the dynamical effects of climate 
change and ozone depletion. Part II. Southern Hemisphere troposphere. J. Clim., 
24, 1850–1868.
Meinshausen, M., T. Wigley, and S. Raper, 2011a: Emulating atmosphere-ocean 
and carbon cycle models with a simpler model, MAGICC6–Part 2: Applications. 
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 1457–1471.
Meinshausen, M., et al., 2011b: The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their 
extensions from 1765 to 2300. Clim. Change, 109, 213–241.
Mercado, L. M., N. Bellouin, S. Sitch, O. Boucher, C. Huntingford, M. Wild, and P. M. 
Cox, 2009: Impact of changes in diffuse radiation on the global land carbon sink. 
Nature, 458, 1014–1017.
Merikanto, J., D. Spracklen, G. Mann, S. Pickering, and K. Carslaw, 2009: Impact of 
nucleation on global CCN. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 8601–8616.
Mickley, L. J., E. M. Leibensperger, D. J. Jacob, and D. Rind, 2012: Regional warming 
from aerosol removal over the United States: Results from a transient 2010–
2050 climate simulation. Atmos. Environ., 46, 545–553.
Miller, G. H., et al., 2012: Abrupt onset of the Little Ice Age triggered by volcanism 
and sustained by sea-ice/ocean feedbacks. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L02708.
Miller, R. L., I. Tegen, and J. Perlwitz, 2004: Surface radiative forcing by soil dust 
aerosols and the hydrologic cycle. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 109, D04203.
Mills, M. J., O. B. Toon, R. P. Turco, D. E. Kinnison, and R. R. Garcia, 2008: Massive 
global ozone loss predicted following regional nuclear conflict. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A., 105, 5307–5312.
Ming, Y., and V. Ramaswamy, 2012: Nonlocal component of radiative flux 
perturbation. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L22706.
Ming, Y., V. Ramaswamy, and G. Persad, 2010: Two opposing effects of absorbing 
aerosols on global-mean precipitation. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L13701.
Ming, Y., V. Ramaswamy, and G. Chen, 2011: A model investigation of aerosol-
induced changes in boreal winter extratropical circulation. J. Clim., 24, 6077–
6091.
Ming, Y., V. Ramaswamy, L. J. Donner, V. T. J. Phillips, S. A. Klein, P. A. Ginoux, and L. W. 
Horowitz, 2007: Modeling the interactions between aerosols and liquid water 
clouds with a self-consistent cloud scheme in a general circulation model. J. 
Atmos. Sci., 64, 1189–1209.
Mirme, S., A. Mirme, A. Minikin, A. Petzold, U. Horrak, V.-M. Kerminen, and M. 
Kulmala, 2010: Atmospheric sub-3 nm particles at high altitudes. Atm. Chem. 
Phys., 10, 437–451.
Montzka, S. A., E. J. Dlugokencky, and J. H. Butler, 2011: Non-CO2 greenhouse gases 
and climate change. Nature, 476, 43–50.
Morrill, J., L. Floyd, and D. McMullin, 2011: The solar ultraviolet spectrum estimated 
using the Mg II Index and Ca II K disk activity. Solar Physics, 269, 253–267.
Muhle, J., et al., 2009: Sulfuryl fluoride in the global atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 114, D05306.
Mulitza, S., et al., 2010: Increase in African dust flux at the onset of commercial 
agriculture in the Sahel region. Nature, 466, 226–228.
Murphy, D., and D. Fahey, 1994: An estimate of the flux of stratospheric reactive 
nitrogen and ozone into the troposphere. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 99, 5325–
5332.
Myhre, G., M. M. Kvalevag, and C. B. Schaaf, 2005a: Radiative forcing due to 
anthropogenic vegetation change based on MODIS surface albedo data. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L21410.
Myhre, G., E. J. Highwood, K. P. Shine, and F. Stordal, 1998: New estimates of 
radiative forcing due to well mixed greenhouse gases. Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 
2715–2718.
Myhre, G., Y. Govaerts, J. M. Haywood, T. K. Berntsen, and A. Lattanzio, 2005b: 
Radiative effect of surface albedo change from biomass burning. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 32, L20812.
Myhre, G., J. Nilsen, L. Gulstad, K. Shine, B. Rognerud, and I. Isaksen, 2007: Radiative 
forcing due to stratospheric water vapour from CH4 oxidation. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 34, L01807.
Myhre, G., et al., 2011: Radiative forcing due to changes in ozone and methane 
caused by the transport sector. Atmos. Environ., 45, 387–394.
Myhre, G., et al., 2013: Radiative forcing of the direct aerosol effect from AeroCom 
Phase II simulations. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 1853–1877.
Nagai, T., B. Liley, T. Sakai, T. Shibata, and O. Uchino, 2010: Post-Pinatubo evolution 
and subsequent trend of the stratospheric aerosol layer observed by mid-
latitude lidars in both hemispheres. Sola, 6, 69–72.
Naik, V., D. L. Mauzerall, L. W. Horowitz, M. D. Schwarzkopf, V. Ramaswamy, and M. 
Oppenheimer, 2007: On the sensitivity of radiative forcing from biomass burning 
aerosols and ozone to emission location. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L03818.
=== PAGE 69 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
727
Nair, U. S., D. K. Ray, J. Wang, S. A. Christopher, T. J. Lyons, R. M. Welch, and R. A. Pielke, 
2007: Observational estimates of radiative forcing due to land use change in 
southwest Australia. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 112, D09117.
Neely, R. R., et al., 2013: Recent anthropogenic increases in SO2 from Asia have 
minimal impact on stratospheric aerosol. Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 999-1004.
O’ishi, R., A. Abe-Ouchi, I. Prentice, and S. Sitch, 2009: Vegetation dynamics and plant 
CO2 responses as positive feedbacks in a greenhouse world. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
36, L11706.
O’Neill, B., 2000: The jury is still out on global warming potentials. Clim. Change, 
44, 427–443.
O’Neill, B., 2003: Economics, natural science, and the costs of global warming 
potentials—An editorial comment. Clim. Change, 58, 251–260.
Oleson, K. W., G. B. Bonan, and J. Feddema, 2010: Effects of white roofs on urban 
temperature in a global climate model. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L03701.
Olivié, D. J. L., G. Peters, and D. Saint-Martin, 2012: Atmosphere response time scales 
estimated from AOGCM experiments. J. Climate, 25, 7956–7972.
Olsen, S. C., C. A. McLinden, and M. J. Prather, 2001: Stratospheric N2O–NOy system: 
Testing uncertainties in a three-dimensional framework, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 
28771.
Oreopoulos, L., et al., 2012: The Continual Intercomparison of Radiation Codes: 
Results from Phase I. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 117, D06118.
Osterman, G. B., et al., 2008: Validation of Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) 
measurements of the total, stratospheric, and tropospheric column abundance 
of ozone. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 113, D15S16.
Otterä, O. H., M. Bentsen, H. Drange, and L. L. Suo, 2010: External forcing as a 
metronome for Atlantic multidecadal variability. Nature Geosci., 3, 688–694.
Özdoğan, M., A. Robock, and C. J. Kucharik, 2013: Impacts of a nuclear war in South 
Asia on soybean and maize production in the Midwest United States. Clim. 
Change, 116, 373–387.
Parrish, D. D., D. B. Millet, and A. H. Goldstein, 2009: Increasing ozone in marine 
boundary layer inflow at the west coasts of North America and Europe. Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 9, 1303–1323.
Paulot, F., J. D. Crounse, H. G. Kjaergaard, A. Kurten, J. M. St Clair, J. H. Seinfeld, 
and P. O. Wennberg, 2009: Unexpected epoxide formation in the gas-phase 
photooxidation of isoprene. Science, 325, 730–733.
Paynter, D., and V. Ramaswamy, 2011: An assessment of recent water vapor 
continuum measurements upon longwave and shortwave radiative transfer. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D20302.
Pechony, O., and D. Shindell, 2010: Driving forces of global wildfires over the past 
millennium and the forthcoming century. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 107, 
19167–19170.
Peeters, J., T. L. Nguyen, and L. Vereecken, 2009: HO(x) radical regeneration in the 
oxidation of isoprene. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 11, 5935–5939.
Penn, M., and W. Livingston, 2006: Temporal changes in sunspot umbral magnetic 
fields and temperatures. Astrophys. J., 649, L45–L48.
Penner, J., L. Xu, and M. Wang, 2011: Satellite methods underestimate indirect 
climate forcing by aerosols. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 108, 13404–13408.
Penner, J., et al., 2006: Model intercomparison of indirect aerosol effects. Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 6, 3391–3405.
Perlwitz, J., and R. L. Miller, 2010: Cloud cover increase with increasing aerosol 
absorptivity: A counterexample to the conventional semidirect aerosol effect. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D08203.
Persad, G. G., Y. Ming, and V. Ramaswamy, 2012: Tropical tropospheric-only responses 
to absorbing aerosols. J. Clim., 25, 2471–2480.
Peters, G., B. Aamaas, T. Berntsen, and J. Fuglestvedt, 2011a: The integrated global 
temperature change potential (iGTP) and relationships between emission 
metrics. Environ. Res. Lett., 6, 044021.
Peters, G. P., B. Aamaas, M. T. Lund, C. Solli, and J. S. Fuglestvedt, 2011b: Alternative 
“Global Warming” metrics in life cycle assessment: A case study with existing 
transportation data. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45, 8633–8641.
Peters, K., P. Stier, J. Quaas, and H. Grassl, 2012: Aerosol indirect effects from shipping 
emissions: Sensitivity studies with the global aerosol-climate model ECHAM-
HAM. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 5985–6007.
Philipona, R., K. Behrens, and C. Ruckstuhl, 2009: How declining aerosols and rising 
greenhouse gases forced rapid warming in Europe since the 1980s. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 36, L02806.
Pinto, J. P., R. P. Turco, and O. B. Toon, 1989: Self-limiting physical and chemical 
effects in volcanic-eruption clouds. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 94, 11165–11174.
Pitman, A. J., et al., 2009: Uncertainties in climate responses to past land cover 
change: First results from the LUCID intercomparison study. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
36, L14814.
Plattner, G.-K., T. Stocker, P. Midgley, and M. Tignor, 2009: IPCC Expert Meeting 
on the Science of Alternative Metrics: Meeting Report. IPCC Working Group I, 
Technical Support Unit.
Plattner, G. K., et al., 2008: Long-term climate commitments projected with climate-
carbon cycle models. J. Clim., 21, 2721–2751.
Pongratz, J., C. Reick, T. Raddatz, and M. Claussen, 2008: A reconstruction of global 
agricultural areas and land cover for the last millennium. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 22, Gb3018.
Pongratz, J., C. H. Reick, T. Raddatz, and M. Claussen, 2010: Biogeophysical versus 
biogeochemical climate response to historical anthropogenic land cover change. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L08702.
Pongratz, J., T. Raddatz, C. H. Reick, M. Esch, and M. Claussen, 2009: Radiative 
forcing from anthropogenic land cover change since AD 800. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
36, L02709.
Pozzer, A., et al., 2012: Effects of business-as-usual anthropogenic emissions on air 
quality. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 6915–6937.
Prather, M., 2002: Lifetimes of atmospheric species: Integrating environmental 
impacts. Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 2063.
Prather, M., and J. Hsu, 2010: Coupling of nitrous oxide and methane by global 
atmospheric chemistry. Science, 330, 952–954.
Prather, M. J., 1998: Time scales in atmospheric chemistry: Coupled perturbations to 
N2O, NOy, and O3. Science, 279, 1339–1341.
Prather, M. J., C. D. Holmes, and J. Hsu, 2012: Reactive greenhouse gas scenarios: 
Systematic exploration of uncertainties and the role of atmospheric chemistry. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L09803.
Puma, M. J., and B. I. Cook, 2010: Effects of irrigation on global climate during the 
20th century. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D16120.
Quaas, J., O. Boucher, N. Bellouin, and S. Kinne, 2011: Which of satellite- or model-
based estimates is closer to reality for aerosol indirect forcing? Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A., 108, E1099.
Quaas, J., et al., 2009: Aerosol indirect effects—general circulation model 
intercomparison and evaluation with satellite data. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 
8697–8717.
Rajakumar, B., R. Portmann, J. Burkholder, and A. Ravishankara, 2006: Rate 
coefficients for the reactions of OH with CF3CH2CH3 (HFC-263fb), CF3CHFCH2F 
(HFC-245eb), and CHF2CHFCHF2 (HFC-245ea) between 238 and 375 K. J. Phys. 
Chem. A, 110, 6724–6731.
Ramanathan, V., and G. Carmichael, 2008: Global and regional climate changes due 
to black carbon. Nature Geosci., 1, 221–227.
Ramanathan, V., et al., 2005: Atmospheric brown clouds: Impacts on South Asian 
climate and hydrological cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 102, 5326–5333.
Ramaswamy, V., et al., 2001: Radiative forcing of climate change. In: Climate 
Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmntal Panel on Climate Change [J. 
T. Houghton, Y. Ding, D. J. Griggs, M. Noquer, P. J. van der Linden, X. Dai, K. 
Maskell and C. A. Johnson (eds.)]. Cambride University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 349-416.
Randel, W., and F. Wu, 2007: A stratospheric ozone profile data set for 1979–2005: 
Variability, trends, and comparisons with column ozone data. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 112, D06313.
Randles, C. A., and V. Ramaswamy, 2008: Absorbing aerosols over Asia: A Geophysical 
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory general circulation model sensitivity study of model 
response to aerosol optical depth and aerosol absorption. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 113, D21203.
Rasch, P. J., et al., 2008: An overview of geoengineering of climate using stratospheric 
sulphate aerosols. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A, 366, 4007–4037.
Ravishankara, A. R., J. S. Daniel, and R. W. Portmann, 2009: Nitrous oxide (N2O): The 
dominant ozone-depleting substance emitted in the 21st century. Science, 326, 
123–125.
Rechid, D., T. Raddatz, and D. Jacob, 2009: Parameterization of snow-free land 
surface albedo as a function of vegetation phenology based on MODIS data and 
applied in climate modelling. Theor. Appl. Climatol., 95, 245–255.
Reddy, M., and O. Boucher, 2007: Climate impact of black carbon emitted from 
energy consumption in the world’s regions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L11802.
Reilly, J., et al., 1999: Multi-gas assessment of the Kyoto Protocol. Nature, 401, 
549–555.
=== PAGE 70 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
728
Reilly, J. M., and K. R. Richards, 1993: Climate-change damage and the trace-gas-
index issue. Environ. Resour. Econ., 3, 41–61.
Reisinger, A., M. Meinshausen, and M. Manning, 2011: Future changes in global 
warming potentials under representative concentration pathways. Environ. Res. 
Lett., 6, 024020.
Reisinger, A., M. Meinshausen, M. Manning, and G. Bodeker, 2010: Uncertainties of 
global warming metrics: CO2 and CH4. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L14707.
Reisinger, A., P. Havlik, K. Riahi, O. Vliet, M. Obersteiner, and M. Herrero, 2013: 
Implications of alternative metrics for global mitigation costs and greenhouse 
gas emissions from agriculture. Clim. Change, 117,  677-690.
Righi, M., C. Klinger, V. Eyring, J. Hendricks, A. Lauer, and A. Petzold, 2011: Climate 
impact of biofuels in shipping: global model studies of the aerosol indirect 
effect. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45, 3519–3525.
Rigozo, N., E. Echer, L. Vieira, and D. Nordemann, 2001: Reconstruction of Wolf 
sunspot numbers on the basis of spectral characteristics and estimates of 
associated radio flux and solar wind parameters for the last millennium. Sol. 
Phys., 203, 179–191.
Rigozo, N., D. Nordemann, E. Echer, M. Echer, and H. Silva, 2010: Prediction of solar 
minimum and maximum epochs on the basis of spectral characteristics for the 
next millennium. Planet. Space Sci., 58, 1971–1976.
Robock, A., 2000: Volcanic eruptions and climate. Rev. Geophys., 38, 191–219.
Robock, A., 2010: New START, Eyjafjallajökull, and Nuclear Winter. Eos, 91, 444–445.
Robock, A., L. Oman, and G. L. Stenchikov, 2007a: Nuclear winter revisited with 
a modern climate model and current nuclear arsenals: Still catastrophic 
consequences. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 112, D13107.
Robock, A., L. Oman, and G. L. Stenchikov, 2008: Regional climate responses to 
geoengineering with tropical and Arctic SO2 injections. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
113, D16101.
Robock, A., L. Oman, G. L. Stenchikov, O. B. Toon, C. Bardeen, and R. P. Turco, 2007b: 
Climatic consequences of regional nuclear conflicts. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7, 
2003–2012.
Robock, A., C. M. Ammann, L. Oman, D. Shindell, S. Levis, and G. Stenchikov, 2009: 
Did the Toba volcanic eruption of similar to 74 ka BP produce widespread 
glaciation? J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D10107.
Rogelj, J., et al., 2011: Emission pathways consistent with a 2 degrees C global 
temperature limit. Nature Clim. Change, 1, 413–418.
Roscoe, H. K., and J. D. Haigh, 2007: Influences of ozone depletion, the solar cycle 
and the QBO on the Southern Annular Mode. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 133, 1855–
1864.
Rotenberg, E., and D. Yakir, 2010: Contribution of semi-arid forests to the climate 
system. Science, 327, 451–454.
Rothman, L., 2010: The evolution and impact of the HITRAN molecular spectroscopic 
database. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 111, 1565–1567.
Rotstayn, L., and J. Penner, 2001: Indirect aerosol forcing, quasi forcing, and climate 
response. J. Clim., 14, 2960–2975.
Rotstayn, L. D., and U. Lohmann, 2002: Tropical rainfall trends and the indirect 
aerosol effect. J. Clim., 15, 2103–2116.
Rotstayn, L. D., B. F. Ryan, and J. E. Penner, 2000: Precipitation changes in a GCM 
resulting from the indirect effects of anthropogenic aerosols. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
27, 3045–3048.
Rottman, G., 2006: Measurement of total and spectral solar irradiance. Space Sci. 
Rev., 125, 39–51.
Ruckstuhl, C., et al., 2008: Aerosol and cloud effects on solar brightening and the 
recent rapid warming. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L12708.
Russell, C., J. Luhmann, and L. Jian, 2010: How unprecedented a solar minimum? 
Rev. Geophys., 48, RG2004.
Rypdal, K., N. Rive, T. Berntsen, Z. Klimont, T. Mideksa, G. Myhre, and R. Skeie, 2009: 
Costs and global impacts of black carbon abatement strategies. Tellus B., 61, 
625–641.
Rypdal, K., et al., 2005: Tropospheric ozone and aerosols in climate agreements: 
Scientific and political challenges. Environ. Sci. Policy, 8, 29–43.
Salby, M. L., E. A. Titova, and L. Deschamps, 2012: Changes of the Antarctic ozone 
hole: Controlling mechanisms, seasonal predictability, and evolution. J. Geophys. 
Res. Atmos., 117, D10111.
Sarofim, M., 2012: The GTP of methane: Modeling analysis of temperature impacts of 
methane and carbon dioxide reductions. Environ. Model. Assess., 17, 231–239.
Sato, M., J. E. Hansen, M. P. McCormick, and J. B. Pollack, 1993: Stratospheric aerosol 
optical depths, 1850–1990. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 98, 22987–22994.
Schaaf, C., et al., 2002: First operational BRDF, albedo nadir reflectance products 
from MODIS. Remote Sens. Environ., 83, 135–148.
Schmalensee, R., 1993: Comparing greenhouse gases for policy purposes. Energy J., 
14, 245–256.
Schmidt, A., K. S. Carslaw, G. W. Mann, M. Wilson, T. J. Breider, S. J. Pickering, and 
T. Thordarson, 2010: The impact of the 1783–1784 AD Laki eruption on global 
aerosol formation processes and cloud condensation nuclei. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 
10, 6025–6041.
Schmidt, A., et al., 2012: Importance of tropospheric volcanic aerosol for indirect 
radiative forcing of climate. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 7321–7339.
Schmidt, G., et al., 2011: Climate forcing reconstructions for use in PMIP simulations 
of the last millennium (v1.0). Geosci. Model Dev., 4, 33–45.
Schneider, D. P., C. M. Ammann, B. L. Otto-Bliesner, and D. S. Kaufman, 2009: Climate 
response to large, high-latitude and low-latitude volcanic eruptions in the 
Community Climate System Model. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D15101.
Schultz, M. G., et al., 2008: Global wildland fire emissions from 1960 to 2000. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 22, Gb2002.
Seinfeld, J. H., and S. N. Pandis, 2006: Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: From Air 
Pollution to Climate Change. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA.
Self, S., and S. Blake, 2008: Consequences of explosive supereruptions. Elements, 
4, 41–46.
Sharma, S., D. Lavoue, H. Cachier, L. Barrie, and S. Gong, 2004: Long-term trends of 
the black carbon concentrations in the Canadian Arctic. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 
109, D15203.
Shibata, K., and K. Kodera, 2005: Simulation of radiative and dynamical responses 
of the middle atmosphere to the 11-year solar cycle. J. Atmos. Sol. Terres. Phys., 
67, 125–143.
Shindell, D., and G. Faluvegi, 2009: Climate response to regional radiative forcing 
during the twentieth century. Nature Geosci., 2, 294–300.
Shindell, D., and G. Faluvegi, 2010: The net climate impact of coal-fired power plant 
emissions. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 3247–3260.
Shindell, D., G. Schmidt, M. Mann, D. Rind, and A. Waple, 2001: Solar forcing of 
regional climate change during the maunder minimum. Science, 294, 2149–
2152.
Shindell, D., G. Faluvegi, A. Lacis, J. Hansen, R. Ruedy, and E. Aguilar, 2006a: Role of 
tropospheric ozone increases in 20th-century climate change. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 111, D08302.
Shindell, D., G. Faluvegi, R. Miller, G. Schmidt, J. Hansen, and S. Sun, 2006b: Solar and 
anthropogenic forcing of tropical hydrology. Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L24706.
Shindell, D., M. Schulz, Y. Ming, T. Takemura, G. Faluvegi, and V. Ramaswamy, 2010: 
Spatial scales of climate response to inhomogeneous radiative forcing. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 115, D19110.
Shindell, D., et al., 2008: Climate forcing and air quality change due to regional 
emissions reductions by economic sector. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 7101–7113.
Shindell, D., et al., 2011: Climate, health, agricultural and economic impacts of 
tighter vehicle-emission standards. Nature Clim. Change, 1, 59–66.
Shindell, D., et al., 2013a: Attribution of historical ozone forcing to anthropogenic 
emissions. Nature Clim. Change, 3, 567-570.
Shindell, D., et al., 2012a: Simultaneously mitigating near-term climate change and 
improving human health and food Security. Science, 335, 183–189.
Shindell, D. T., 2012: Evaluation of the absolute regional temperature potential. 
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 7955–7960.
Shindell, D. T., A. Voulgarakis, G. Faluvegi, and G. Milly, 2012b: Precipitation response 
to regional radiative forcing. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 6969–6982.
Shindell, D. T., G. Faluvegi, D. M. Koch, G. A. Schmidt, N. Unger, and S. E. Bauer, 2009: 
Improved attribution of climate forcing to emissions. Science, 326, 716–718.
Shindell, D. T., et al., 2006c: Simulations of preindustrial, present-day, and 2100 
conditions in the NASA GISS composition and climate model G-PUCCINI. Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 6, 4427–4459.
Shindell, D. T., et al., 2013b: Interactive ozone and methane chemistry in GISS-E2 
historical and future climate simulations. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2653–2689.
Shindell, D. T., et al., 2013c: Radiative forcing in the ACCMIP historical and future 
climate simulations. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2939–2974.
Shine, K., 2009: The global warming potential-the need for an interdisciplinary 
retrial. Clim. Change, 96, 467–472.
Shine, K., J. Cook, E. Highwood, and M. Joshi, 2003: An alternative to radiative 
forcing for estimating the relative importance of climate change mechanisms. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 30, 2047.
=== PAGE 71 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
729
Shine, K., J. Fuglestvedt, K. Hailemariam, and N. Stuber, 2005a: Alternatives to 
the global warming potential for comparing climate impacts of emissions of 
greenhouse gases. Clim. Change, 68, 281–302.
Shine, K., T. Berntsen, J. Fuglestvedt, and R. Sausen, 2005b: Scientific issues in the 
design of metrics for inclusion of oxides of nitrogen in global climate agreements. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 102, 15768–15773.
Shine, K., T. Berntsen, J. Fuglestvedt, R. Skeie, and N. Stuber, 2007: Comparing the 
climate effect of emissions of short- and long-lived climate agents. Philos. Trans. 
R. Soc. A, 365, 1903–1914.
Shine, K. P., I. V. Ptashnik, and G. Raedel, 2012: The water vapour continuum: Brief 
history and recent developments. Surv. Geophys., 33, 535–555.
Siddaway, J. M., and S. V. Petelina, 2011: Transport and evolution of the 2009 
Australian Black Saturday bushfire smoke in the lower stratosphere observed by 
OSIRIS on Odin. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, D06203.
Sitch, S., P. M. Cox, W. J. Collins, and C. Huntingford, 2007: Indirect radiative forcing 
of climate change through ozone effects on the land-carbon sink. Nature, 448, 
791–794.
Skeie, R., T. Berntsen, G. Myhre, K. Tanaka, M. Kvalevag, and C. Hoyle, 2011a: 
Anthropogenic radiative forcing time series from pre-industrial times until 2010. 
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 11827–11857.
Skeie, R., T. Berntsen, G. Myhre, C. Pedersen, J. Strom, S. Gerland, and J. Ogren, 
2011b: Black carbon in the atmosphere and snow, from pre-industrial times 
until present. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 6809–6836.
Skeie, R. B., J. Fuglestvedt, T. Berntsen, M. T. Lund, G. Myhre, and K. Rypdal, 2009: 
Global temperature change from the transport sectors: Historical development 
and future scenarios. Atmos. Environ., 43, 6260–6270.
Smith, E., and A. Balogh, 2008: Decrease in heliospheric magnetic flux in this solar 
minimum: Recent Ulysses magnetic field observations. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, 
L22103.
Smith, S., and M. Wigley, 2000: Global warming potentials: 1. Climatic implications 
of emissions reductions. Clim. Change, 44, 445–457.
Smith, S., J. Karas, J. Edmonds, J. Eom, and A. Mizrahi, 2013: Sensitivity of multi-gas 
climate policy to emission metrics. Clim. Change, 117, 663–675.
Smith, S. M., J. A. Lowe, N. H. A. Bowerman, L. K. Gohar, C. Huntingford, and M. 
R. Allen, 2012: Equivalence of greenhouse-gas emissions for peak temperature 
limits. Nature Clim. Change, 2, 535–538.
Snow-Kropla, E., J. Pierce, D. Westervelt, and W. Trivitayanurak, 2011: Cosmic 
rays, aerosol formation and cloud-condensation nuclei: Sensitivities to model 
uncertainties. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 4001–4013.
Solanki, S., and N. Krivova, 2004: Solar irradiance variations: From current 
measurements to long-term estimates. Sol. Phys., 224, 197–208.
Solomon, S., 1999: Stratospheric ozone depletion: A review of concepts and history. 
Rev. Geophys., 37, 275–316.
Solomon, S., J. S. Daniel, R. R. Neely, J. P. Vernier, E. G. Dutton, and L. W. Thomason, 
2011: The persistently variable “background” stratospheric aerosol layer and 
global climate change. Science, 333, 866–870.
Son, S. W., N. F. Tandon, L. M. Polvani, and D. W. Waugh, 2009: Ozone hole and 
Southern Hemisphere climate change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L15705.
Soukharev, B., and L. Hood, 2006: Solar cycle variation of stratospheric ozone: 
Multiple regression analysis of long-term satellite data sets and comparisons 
with models. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 111, D20314.
Søvde, O., C. Hoyle, G. Myhre, and I. Isaksen, 2011: The HNO3 forming branch of the 
HO2 + NO reaction: Pre-industrial-to-present trends in atmospheric species and 
radiative forcings. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 8929–8943.
Steinhilber, F., J. Beer, and C. Frohlich, 2009: Total solar irradiance during the 
Holocene. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L19704.
Stenchikov, G., A. Robock, V. Ramaswamy, M. D. Schwarzkopf, K. Hamilton, and S. 
Ramachandran, 2002: Arctic Oscillation response to the 1991 Mount Pinatubo 
eruption: Effects of volcanic aerosols and ozone depletion. J. Geophys. Res. 
Atmos., 107, 4803.
Stenchikov, G., T. L. Delworth, V. Ramaswamy, R. J. Stouffer, A. Wittenberg, and F. R. 
Zeng, 2009: Volcanic signals in oceans. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D16104.
Stephens, G. L., N. B. Wood, and L. A. Pakula, 2004: On the radiative effects of dust 
on tropical convection. Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L23112.
Stevenson, D., and R. Derwent, 2009: Does the location of aircraft nitrogen oxide 
emissions affect their climate impact? Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L17810.
Stevenson, D. S., et al., 2013: Tropospheric ozone changes, radiative forcing and 
attribution to emissions in the Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model 
Intercomparison Project (ACCMIP). Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 3063–3085.
Stevenson, D. S., et al., 2006: Multimodel ensemble simulations of present-day and 
near-future tropospheric ozone. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 111, D08301.
Stiller, G. P., et al., 2012: Observed temporal evolution of global mean age of 
stratospheric air for the 2002 to 2010 period. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 3311–
3331.
Stothers, R. B., 2007: Three centuries of observation of stratospheric transparency. 
Clim. Change, 83, 515–521.
Struthers, H., et al., 2011: The effect of sea ice loss on sea salt aerosol concentrations 
and the radiative balance in the Arctic. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 3459–3477.
Swann, A. L. S., I. Y. Fung, and J. C. H. Chiang, 2012: Mid-latitude afforestation shifts 
general circulation and tropical precipitation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 109, 
712–716.
Swingedouw, D., L. Terray, C. Cassou, A. Voldoire, D. Salas-Melia, and J. Servonnat, 
2011: Natural forcing of climate during the last millennium: Fingerprint of solar 
variability. Clim. Dyn., 36, 1349–1364.
Takemura, T., 2012: Distributions and climate effects of atmospheric aerosols from 
the preindustrial era to 2100 along Representative Concentration Pathways 
(RCPs) simulated using the global aerosol model SPRINTARS. Atmos. Chem. 
Phys., 12, 11555–11572.
Tanaka, K., D. Johansson, B. O’Neill, and J. Fuglestvedt, 2013: Emission metrics under 
the 2°C climate stabilization. Clim. Change Lett. , 117, 933-941.
Tanaka, K., B. O’Neill, D. Rokityanskiy, M. Obersteiner, and R. Tol, 2009: Evaluating 
Global Warming Potentials with historical temperature. Clim. Change, 96, 443–
466.
Taraborrelli, D., et al., 2012: Hydroxyl radical buffered by isoprene oxidation over 
tropical forests. Nature Geosci., 5, 190–193.
Taylor, P. C., R. G. Ellingson, and M. Cai, 2011: Seasonal variations of climate 
feedbacks in the NCAR CCSM3. J. Clim., 24, 3433–3444.
Textor, C., et al., 2006: Analysis and quantification of the diversities of aerosol life 
cycles within AeroCom. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 1777–1813.
Thomason, L., and T. Peter, 2006: Assessment of Stratospheric Aerosol Properties 
(ASAP). SPARC ReportsWCRP-124, WMO/TD- No. 1295, SPARC Report No. 4.
Thompson, D. W. J., S. Solomon, P. J. Kushner, M. H. England, K. M. Grise, and D. J. 
Karoly, 2011: Signatures of the Antarctic ozone hole in Southern Hemisphere 
surface climate change. Nature Geosci., 4, 741–749.
Thonicke, K., A. Spessa, I. C. Prentice, S. P. Harrison, L. Dong, and C. Carmona-
Moreno, 2010: The influence of vegetation, fire spread and fire behaviour on 
biomass burning and trace gas emissions: Results from a process-based model. 
Biogeosciences, 7, 1991–2011.
Tilmes, S., et al., 2012: Technical Note: Ozonesonde climatology between 1995 and 
2011: Description, evaluation and applications. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 7475–
7497.
Timmreck, C., 2012: Modeling the climatic effects of large explosive volcanic 
eruptions. Climate Change, 3, 545–564.
Timmreck, C., et al., 2010: Aerosol size confines climate response to volcanic super-
eruptions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L24705.
Tol, R., T. Berntsen, B. O’Neill, J. Fuglestvedt, and K. Shine, 2012: A unifying framework 
for metrics for aggregating the climate effect of different emissions. Environ. 
Res. Lett., 7, 044006.
Toon, O. B., A. Robock, and R. P. Turco, 2008: Environmental consequences of nuclear 
war. Physics Today, 61, 37–42.
Trenberth, K. E., and A. Dai, 2007: Effects of Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption on 
the hydrological cycle as an analog of geoengineering. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, 
L15702.
Tsigaridis, K., and M. Kanakidou, 2007: Secondary organic aerosol importance in the 
future atmosphere. Atmos. Environ., 41, 4682–4692.
UNEP, 2011: Near-term Climate Protection and Clean Air Benefits: Actions 
for Controlling Short-Lived Climate Forcers. United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), 78 pp.
Unger, N., T. C. Bond, J. S. Wang, D. M. Koch, S. Menon, D. T. Shindell, and S. Bauer, 
2010: Attribution of climate forcing to economic sectors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A., 107, 3382–3387.
van der Molen, M. K., B. J. J. M. van den Hurk, and W. Hazeleger, 2011: A dampened 
land use change climate response towards the tropics. Clim. Dyn., 37, 2035–
2043.
van der Werf, G. R., et al., 2010: Global fire emissions and the contribution of 
deforestation, savanna, forest, agricultural, and peat fires (1997–2009). Atmos. 
Chem. Phys., 10, 11707–11735.
=== PAGE 72 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
730
van Vuuren, D., J. Edmonds, M. Kainuma, K. Riahi, and J. Weyant, 2011: A special 
issue on the RCPs. Clim. Change, 109, 1–4.
Van Vuuren, D. P., et al., 2008: Temperature increase of 21st century mitigation 
scenarios. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 105, 15258–15262.
Vasekova, E., E. Drage, K. Smith, and N. Mason, 2006: FTIR spectroscopy and 
radiative forcing of octafluorocyclobutane and octofluorocyclopentene. J. Quant. 
Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 102, 418–424.
Velders, G. J. M., D. W. Fahey, J. S. Daniel, M. McFarland, and S. O. Andersen, 2009: 
The large contribution of projected HFC emissions to future climate forcing. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 106, 10949–10954.
Vernier, J. P., L. W. Thomason, T. D. Fairlie, P. Minnis, R. Palikonda, and K. M. Bedka, 
2013: Comment on “Large Volcanic Aerosol Load in the Stratosphere Linked to 
Asian Monsoon Transport”. Science, 339, 647-d.
Vernier, J. P., et al., 2011: Major influence of tropical volcanic eruptions on the 
stratospheric aerosol layer during the last decade. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, 
L12807.
Vial, J., J.-L. Dufresne, and S. Bony, 2013: On the interpretation of inter-model spread 
in CMIP5 climate sensitivity estimates. Clim. Dyn., doi:10.1007/s00382-013-
1725-9, in press.
Volz, A., and D. Kley, 1988: Evaluation of the Montsouris Series of ozone 
measurements made in the 19th century. Nature, 332, 240–242.
Voulgarakis, A., and D. T. Shindell, 2010: Constraining the sensitivity of regional 
climate with the use of historical observations. J. Clim., 23, 6068–6073.
Voulgarakis, A., et al., 2013: Analysis of present day and future OH and methane 
lifetime in the ACCMIP simulations. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2563–2587.
Wang, C., D. Kim, A. Ekman, M. Barth, and P. Rasch, 2009: Impact of anthropogenic 
aerosols on Indian summer monsoon. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L21704.
Wang, M., and J. E. Penner, 2009: Aerosol indirect forcing in a global model with 
particle nucleation. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 239–260.
Wang, X., S. J. Doherty, and J. Huang, 2013: Black carbon and other light-absorbing 
impurities in snow across Northern China. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118, 1471–
1492.
Wang, Y., J. Lean, and N. Sheeley, 2005: Modeling the sun’s magnetic field and 
irradiance since 1713. Astrophys. J., 625, 522–538.
Warren, S., and W. Wiscombe, 1980: A model for the spectral albedo of snow. 2. 
Snow containing atmospheric aerosols. J. Atmos. Sci., 37, 2734–2745.
Weiss, R., J. Muhle, P. Salameh, and C. Harth, 2008: Nitrogen trifluoride in the global 
atmosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L20821.
Wenzler, T., S. Solanki, and N. Krivova, 2009: Reconstructed and measured total solar 
irradiance: Is there a secular trend between 1978 and 2003? Geophys. Res. Lett., 
36, L11102.
Wilcox, L., K. Shine, and B. Hoskins, 2012: Radiative forcing due to aviation water 
vapour emissions. Atmos. Environ., 63, 1–13.
Wild, M., 2009: How well do IPCC-AR4/CMIP3 climate models simulate global 
dimming/brightening and twentieth-century daytime and nighttime warming? 
J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 114, D00D11.
Wild, O., 2007: Modelling the global tropospheric ozone budget: Exploring the 
variability in current models. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7, 2643–2660.
Wild, O., and P. I. Palmer, 2008: How sensitive is tropospheric oxidation to 
anthropogenic emissions? Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L22802.
Wild, O., M. Prather, and H. Akimoto, 2001: Indirect long-term global radiative 
cooling from NOx emissions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 1719–1722.
Williams, K. D., A. Jones, D. L. Roberts, C. A. Senior, and M. J. Woodage, 2001: The 
response of the climate system to the indirect effects of anthropogenic sulfate 
aerosol. Clim. Dyn., 17, 845–856.
Willson, R., and A. Mordvinov, 2003: Secular total solar irradiance trend during solar 
cycles 21–23. Geophys. Res. Lett., 30, 1199.
WMO, 1999: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998. Global Ozone Research 
and Monitoring Project. Report No. 44.World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
WMO, 2011: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 2010. Global Ozone 
Research and Monitoring Project-Report. World Meteorological Organisation, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 516 pp.
Worden, H., K. Bowman, S. Kulawik, and A. Aghedo, 2011: Sensitivity of outgoing 
longwave radiative flux to the global vertical distribution of ozone characterized 
by instantaneous radiative kernels from Aura-TES. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 116, 
D14115.
Worden, H., K. Bowman, J. Worden, A. Eldering, and R. Beer, 2008: Satellite 
measurements of the clear-sky greenhouse effect from tropospheric ozone. 
Nature Geosci., 1, 305–308.
Wright, J., 2004: Do we know of any Maunder minimum stars? Astron. J., 128, 
1273–1278.
Wu, S. L., L. J. Mickley, D. J. Jacob, J. A. Logan, R. M. Yantosca, and D. Rind, 2007: Why 
are there large differences between models in global budgets of tropospheric 
ozone? J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 112, D05302.
Xia, L. L., and A. Robock, 2013: Impacts of a nuclear war in South Asia on rice 
production in Mainland China. Clim. Change, 116, 357–372.
Ye, H., R. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Huang, S. G. Warren, and Q. Fu, 2012: Black carbon in 
seasonal snow across northern Xinjiang in northwestern China. Environ. Res. 
Lett., 7, 044002.
Young, P. J., et al., 2013: Pre-industrial to end 21st century projections of tropospheric 
ozone from the Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model Intercomparison 
Project (ACCMIP). Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 2063–2090.
Zanchettin, D., et al., 2012: Bi-decadal variability excited in the coupled ocean-
atmosphere system by strong tropical volcanic eruptions. Clim. Dyn., 39, 419–
444.
Zarzycki, C. M., and T. C. Bond, 2010: How much can the vertical distribution of black 
carbon affect its global direct radiative forcing? Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L20807.
Zeng, G., J. A. Pyle, and P. J. Young, 2008: Impact of climate change on tropospheric 
ozone and its global budgets. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 369–387.
Zeng, G., O. Morgenstern, P. Braesicke, and J. A. Pyle, 2010: Impact of stratospheric 
ozone recovery on tropospheric ozone and its budget. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, 
L09805.
Zhang, H., G. Y. Shi, and Y. Liu, 2005: A comparison between the two line-by-line 
integration algorithms. Chin. J. Atmos. Sci., 29, 581–593.
Zhang, H., G. Shi, and Y. Liu, 2008: The effects of line-wing cutoff in LBL integration 
on radiation calculations. Acta Meteorol. Sin., 22, 248–255.
Zhang, H., J. Wu, and P. Luc, 2011: A study of the radiative forcing and global 
warming potentials of hydrofluorocarbons. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 
112, 220–229.
Zhang, X. B., et al., 2007: Detection of human influence on twentieth-century 
precipitation trends. Nature, 448, 461–465.
Zhong, Y., G. H. Miller, B. L. Otto-Bliesner, M. M. Holland, D. A. Bailey, D. P. Schneider, 
and A. Geirsdottir, 2011: Centennial-scale climate change from decadally-paced 
explosive volcanism: A coupled sea ice-ocean mechanism. Clim. Dyn., 37, 2373–
2387.
Ziemke, J. R., S. Chandra, G. J. Labow, P. K. Bhartia, L. Froidevaux, and J. C. Witte, 
2011: A global climatology of tropospheric and stratospheric ozone derived from 
Aura OMI and MLS measurements. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 9237–9251.
=== PAGE 73 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
731
Appendix 8.A: Lifetimes, Radiative Efficiencies and Metric Values
Table 8.A.1 |  Radiative efficiencies (REs), lifetimes/adjustment times, AGWP and GWP values for 20 and 100 years, and AGTP and GTP values for 20, 50 and 100 years. Climate–carbon feedbacks are included for CO2 while no climate 
feedbacks are included for the other components (see discussion in Sections 8.7.1.4 and 8.7.2.1, Supplementary Material and notes below the table; Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16 gives analogous values including climate–carbon 
feedbacks for non-CO2 emissions). For a complete list of chemical names and CAS numbers, and for accurate replications of metric values, see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.13 and references therein.
Acronym, Common 
Name or Chemi­
cal Name
Chemical 
Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radiative
Efficiency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
Carbon dioxide
CO2
see*
1.37e-5
2.49e-14
1
9.17e-14
1
6.84e-16
1
6.17e-16
1
5.47e-16
1
Methane
CH4
12.4†
3.63e-4
2.09e-12
84
2.61e-12
28
4.62e-14
67
8.69e-15
14
2.34e-15
4
Fossil methane‡
CH4
12.4†
3.63e-4
2.11e-12
85
2.73e-12
30
4.68e-14
68
9.55e-15
15
3.11e-15
6
Nitrous Oxide
N2O
121†
3.00e-3
6.58e-12
264
2.43e-11
265
1.89e-13
277
1.74e-13
282
1.28e-13
234
Chlorofluorocarbons
CFC-11
CCl3F
45.0
0.26
1.72e-10
6900
4.28e-10
4660
4.71e-12
6890
3.01e-12
4890
1.28e-12
2340
CFC-12
CCl2F2
100.0
0.32
2.69e-10
10,800
9.39e-10
10,200
7.71e-12
11,300
6.75e-12
11,000
4.62e-12
8450
CFC-13
CClF3
640.0
0.25
2.71e-10
10,900
1.27e-09
13,900
7.99e-12
11,700
8.77e-12
14,200
8.71e-12
15,900
CFC-113
CCl2FCClF2
85.0
0.30
1.62e-10
6490
5.34e-10
5820
4.60e-12
6730
3.85e-12
6250
2.45e-12
4470
CFC-114
CClF2CClF2
190.0
0.31
1.92e-10
7710
7.88e-10
8590
5.60e-12
8190
5.56e-12
9020
4.68e-12
8550
CFC-115
CClF2CF3
1,020.0
0.20
1.46e-10
5860
7.03e-10
7670
4.32e-12
6310
4.81e-12
7810
4.91e-12
8980
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons
HCFC-21
CHCl2F
1.7
0.15
1.35e-11
543
1.35e-11
148
1.31e-13
192
1.59e-14
26
1.12e-14
20
HCFC-22
CHClF2
11.9
0.21
1.32e-10
5280
1.62e-10
1760
2.87e-12
4200
5.13e-13
832
1.43e-13
262
HCFC-122
CHCl2CF2Cl
1.0
0.17
5.43e-12
218
5.43e-12
59
4.81e-14
70
6.25e-15
10
4.47e-15
8
HCFC-122a
CHFClCFCl2
3.4
0.21
2.36e-11
945
2.37e-11
258
2.91e-13
426
2.99e-14
48
1.96e-14
36
HCFC-123
CHCl2CF3
1.3
0.15
7.28e-12
292
7.28e-12
79
6.71e-14
98
8.45e-15
14
6.00e-15
11
HCFC-123a
CHClFCF2Cl
4.0
0.23
3.37e-11
1350
3.39e-11
370
4.51e-13
659
4.44e-14
72
2.81e-14
51
HCFC-124
CHClFCF3
5.9
0.20
4.67e-11
1870
4.83e-11
527
7.63e-13
1120
7.46e-14
121
4.03e-14
74
HCFC-132c
CH2FCFCl2
4.3
0.17
3.07e-11
1230
3.10e-11
338
4.27e-13
624
4.14e-14
67
2.58e-14
47
HCFC-141b
CH3CCl2F
9.2
0.16
6.36e-11
2550
7.17e-11
782
1.27e-12
1850
1.67e-13
271
6.09e-14
111
HCFC-142b
CH3CClF2
17.2
0.19
1.25e-10
5020
1.82e-10
1980
3.01e-12
4390
8.46e-13
1370
1.95e-13
356
HCFC-225ca
CHCl2CF2CF3
1.9
0.22
1.17e-11
469
1.17e-11
127
1.17e-13
170
1.38e-14
22
9.65e-15
18
HCFC-225cb
CHClFCF2CClF2
5.9
0.29
4.65e-11
1860
4.81e-11
525
7.61e-13
1110
7.43e-14
120
4.01e-14
73
(E)-1-Chloro-3,3,3-
trifluoroprop-1-ene
trans-CF3CH=CHCl
26.0 days
0.04
1.37e-13
5
1.37e-13
1
1.09e-15
2
1.54e-16
<1
1.12e-16
<1
(continued on next page)
=== PAGE 74 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
732
(continued on next page)
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
Acronym, Common Name 
or Chemical Name
Chemical 
Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radiative
Efficiency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
Hydrofluorocarbons
HFC-23
CHF3
222.0
0.18
2.70e-10
10,800
1.14e-09
12,400
7.88e-12
11,500
7.99e-12
13,000
6.95e-12
12,700
HFC-32
CH2F2
5.2
0.11
6.07e-11
2430
6.21e-11
677
9.32e-13
1360
8.93e-14
145
5.17e-14
94
HFC-41
CH3F
2.8
0.02
1.07e-11
427
1.07e-11
116
1.21e-13
177
1.31e-14
21
8.82e-15
16
HFC-125
CHF2CF3
28.2
0.23
1.52e-10
6090
2.91e-10
3170
3.97e-12
5800
1.84e-12
2980
5.29e-13
967
HFC-134
CHF2CHF2
9.7
0.19
8.93e-11
3580
1.02e-10
1120
1.82e-12
2660
2.54e-13
412
8.73e-14
160
HFC-134a
CH2FCF3
13.4
0.16
9.26e-11
3710
1.19e-10
1300
2.09e-12
3050
4.33e-13
703
1.10e-13
201
HFC-143
CH2FCHF2
3.5
0.13
3.00e-11
1200
3.01e-11
328
3.76e-13
549
3.82e-14
62
2.49e-14
46
HFC-143a
CH3CF3
47.1
0.16
1.73e-10
6940
4.41e-10
4800
4.76e-12
6960
3.12e-12
5060
1.37e-12
2500
HFC-152
CH2FCH2F
0.4
0.04
1.51e-12
60
1.51e-12
16
1.25e-14
18
1.71e-15
3
1.24e-15
2
HFC-152a
CH3CHF2
1.5
0.10
1.26e-11
506
1.26e-11
138
1.19e-13
174
1.47e-14
24
1.04e-14
19
HFC-161
CH3CH2F
66.0 days
0.02
3.33e-13
13
3.33e-13
4
2.70e-15
4
3.76e-16
<1
2.74e-16
<1
HFC-227ca
CF3CF2CHF2
28.2
0.27
1.27e-10
5080
2.42e-10
2640
3.31e-12
4830
1.53e-12
2480
4.41e-13
806
HFC-227ea
CF3CHFCF3
38.9
0.26
1.34e-10
5360
3.07e-10
3350
3.61e-12
5280
2.12e-12
3440
7.98e-13
1460
HFC-236cb
CH2FCF2CF3
13.1
0.23
8.67e-11
3480
1.11e-10
1210
1.94e-12
2840
3.92e-13
636
1.01e-13
185
HFC-236ea
CHF2CHFCF3
11.0
0.30a
1.03e-10
4110
1.22e-10
1330
2.18e-12
3190
3.53e-13
573
1.06e-13
195
HFC-236fa
CF3CH2CF3
242.0
0.24
1.73e-10
6940
7.39e-10
8060
5.06e-12
7400
5.18e-12
8400
4.58e-12
8380
HFC-245ca
CH2FCF2CHF2
6.5
0.24b
6.26e-11
2510
6.56e-11
716
1.07e-12
1570
1.09e-13
176
5.49e-14
100
HFC-245cb
CF3CF2CH3
47.1
0.24
1.67e-10
6680
4.24e-10
4620
4.58e-12
6690
3.00e-12
4870
1.32e-12
2410
HFC-245ea
CHF2CHFCHF2
3.2
0.16c
2.15e-11
863
2.16e-11
235
2.59e-13
378
2.70e-14
44
1.79e-14
33
HFC-245eb
CH2FCHFCF3
3.1
0.20c
2.66e-11
1070
2.66e-11
290
3.15e-13
460
3.31e-14
54
2.20e-14
40
HFC-245fa
CHF2CH2CF3
7.7
0.24
7.29e-11
2920
7.87e-11
858
1.35e-12
1970
1.51e-13
245
6.62e-14
121
HFC-263fb
CH3CH2CF3
1.2
0.10c
6.93e-12
278
6.93e-12
76
6.31e-14
92
8.02e-15
13
5.70e-15
10
HFC-272ca
CH3CF2CH3
2.6
0.07
1.32e-11
530
1.32e-11
144
1.46e-13
213
1.61e-14
26
1.09e-14
20
HFC-329p
CHF2CF2CF2CF3
28.4
0.31
1.13e-10
4510
2.16e-10
2360
2.94e-12
4290
1.37e-12
2220
3.96e-13
725
HFC-365mfc
CH3CF2CH2CF3
8.7
0.22
6.64e-11
2660
7.38e-11
804
1.30e-12
1890
1.62e-13
262
6.24e-14
114
HFC-43-10mee
CF3CHFCHFCF2CF3
16.1
0.42b
1.08e-10
4310
1.51e-10
1650
2.54e-12
3720
6.62e-13
1070
1.54e-13
281
HFC-1132a
CH2=CF2
4.0 days
0.004d
3.87e-15
<1
3.87e-15
<1
3.08e-17
<1
4.35e-18
<1
3.18e-18
<1
HFC-1141
CH2=CHF
2.1 days
0.002d
1.54e-15
<1
1.54e-15
<1
1.23e-17
<1
1.73e-18
<1
1.27e-18
<1
(Z)-HFC-1225ye
CF3CF=CHF(Z)
8.5 days
0.02
2.14e-14
<1
2.14e-14
<1
1.70e-16
<1
2.40e-17
<1
1.76e-17
<1
(E)-HFC-1225ye
CF3CF=CHF(E)
4.9 days
0.01
7.25e-15
<1
7.25e-15
<1
5.77e-17
<1
8.14e-18
<1
5.95e-18
<1
(Z)-HFC-1234ze
CF3CH=CHF(Z)
10.0 days
0.02
2.61e-14
1
2.61e-14
<1
2.08e-16
<1
2.93e-17
<1
2.14e-17
<1
HFC-1234yf
CF3CF=CH2
10.5 days
0.02
3.22e-14
1
3.22e-14
<1
2.57e-16
<1
3.62e-17
<1
2.65e-17
<1
(E)-HFC-1234ze
trans-CF3CH=CHF
16.4 days
0.04
8.74e-14
4
8.74e-14
<1
6.98e-16
<1
9.82e-17
<1
7.18e-17
<1
(Z)-HFC-1336
CF3CH=CHCF3(Z)
22.0 days
0.07d
1.54e-13
6
1.54e-13
2
1.23e-15
2
1.73e-16
<1
1.26e-16
<1
=== PAGE 75 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
733
(continued on next page)
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
Acronym, Common Name or Chemical Name
Chemical Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radia­
tive
Effi­
ciency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
HFC-1243zf
CF3CH=CH2
7.0 days
0.01
1.37e-14
1
1.37e-14
<1
1.09e-16
<1
1.53e-17
<1
1.12e-17
<1
HFC-1345zfc
C2F5CH=CH2
7.6 days
0.01
1.15e-14
<1
1.15e-14
<1
9.19e-17
<1
1.30e-17
<1
9.48e-18
<1
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6-Nonafluorohex-1-ene
C4F9CH=CH2
7.6 days
0.03
1.25e-14
<1
1.25e-14
<1
9.92e-17
<1
1.40e-17
<1
1.02e-17
<1
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-Tridecafluorooct-1-ene
C6F13CH=CH2
7.6 days
0.03
9.89e-15
<1
9.89e-15
<1
7.87e-17
<1
1.11e-17
<1
8.12e-18
<1
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,9,9,10,10,10-Hep­
tadecafluorodec-1-ene
C8F17CH=CH2
7.6 days
0.03
8.52e-15
<1
8.52e-15
<1
6.79e-17
<1
9.57e-18
<1
7.00e-18
<1
Chlorocarbons and Hydrochlorocarbons
Methyl chloroform
CH3CCl3
5.0
0.07
1.44e-11
578
1.47e-11
160
2.17e-13
317
2.07e-14
34
1.22e-14
22
Carbon tetrachloride
CCl4
26.0
0.17
8.69e-11
3480
1.59e-10
1730
2.24e-12
3280
9.68e-13
1570
2.62e-13
479
Methyl chloride
CH3Cl
1.0
0.01a
1.12e-12
45
1.12e-12
12
9.93e-15
15
1.29e-15
2
9.20e-16
2
Methylene chloride
CH2Cl2
0.4
0.03b
8.18e-13
33
8.18e-13
9
6.78e-15
10
9.26e-16
2
6.72e-16
1
Chloroform
CHCl3
0.4
0.08
1.50e-12
60
1.50e-12
16
1.25e-14
18
1.70e-15
3
1.24e-15
2
1,2-Dichloroethane
CH2ClCH2Cl
65.0 days
0.01
8.24e-14
3
8.24e-14
<1
6.67e-16
<1
9.29e-17
<1
6.77e-17
<1
Bromocarbons, Hydrobromocarbons and Halons
Methyl bromide
CH3Br
0.8
0.004
2.16e-13
9
2.16e-13
2
1.87e-15
3
2.47e-16
<1
1.78e-16
<1
Methylene bromide
CH2Br2
0.3
0.01
9.31e-14
4
9.31e-14
1
7.66e-16
1
1.05e-16
<1
7.65e-17
<1
Halon-1201
CHBrF2
5.2
0.15
3.37e-11
1350
3.45e-11
376
5.17e-13
756
4.96e-14
80
2.87e-14
52
Halon-1202
CBr2F2
2.9
0.27
2.12e-11
848
2.12e-11
231
2.43e-13
356
2.61e-14
42
1.75e-14
32
Halon-1211
CBrClF2
16.0
0.29
1.15e-10
4590
1.60e-10
1750
2.70e-12
3950
6.98e-13
1130
1.62e-13
297
Halon-1301
CBrF3
65.0
0.30
1.95e-10
7800
5.77e-10
6290
5.46e-12
7990
4.16e-12
6750
2.28e-12
4170
Halon-2301
CH2BrCF3
3.4
0.14
1.59e-11
635
1.59e-11
173
1.96e-13
286
2.01e-14
33
1.32e-14
24
Halon-2311 / Halothane
CHBrClCF3
1.0
0.13
3.77e-12
151
3.77e-12
41
3.35e-14
49
4.34e-15
7
3.10e-15
6
Halon-2401
CHFBrCF3
2.9
0.19
1.68e-11
674
1.68e-11
184
1.94e-13
283
2.07e-14
34
1.39e-14
25
Halon-2402
CBrF2CBrF2
20.0
0.31
8.59e-11
3440
1.35e-10
1470
2.12e-12
3100
7.08e-13
1150
1.66e-13
304
Fully Fluorinated Species
Nitrogen trifluoride
NF3
500.0
0.20
3.19e-10
12,800
1.47e-09
16,100
9.39e-12
13,700
1.02e-11
16,500
9.91e-12
18,100
Sulphur hexafluoride
SF6
3,200.0
0.57
4.37e-10
17,500
2.16e-09
23,500
1.29e-11
18,900
1.47e-11
23,800
1.54e-11
28,200
(Trifluoromethyl) sulphur pentafluoride
SF5CF3
800.0
0.59
3.36e-10
13,500
1.60e-09
17,400
9.93e-12
14,500
1.10e-11
17,800
1.11e-11
20,200
Sulphuryl fluoride
SO2F2
36.0
0.20
1.71e-10
6840
3.76e-10
4090
4.58e-12
6690
2.55e-12
4140
9.01e-13
1650
PFC-14
CF4
50,000.0
0.09
1.22e-10
4880
6.08e-10
6630
3.61e-12
5270
4.12e-12
6690
4.40e-12
8040
PFC-116
C2F6
10,000.0
0.25
2.05e-10
8210
1.02e-09
11,100
6.07e-12
8880
6.93e-12
11,200
7.36e-12
13,500
PFC-c216
c-C3F6
3,000.0
0.23e
1.71e-10
6850
8.44e-10
9200
5.06e-12
7400
5.74e-12
9310
6.03e-12
11,000
PFC-218
C3F8
2,600.0
0.28
1.66e-10
6640
8.16e-10
8900
4.91e-12
7180
5.56e-12
9010
5.83e-12
10,700
PFC-318
c-C4F8
3,200.0
0.32
1.77e-10
7110
8.75e-10
9540
5.25e-12
7680
5.96e-12
9660
6.27e-12
11,500
=== PAGE 76 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
734
Acronym, Common Name or Chemical Name
Chemical Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radia­
tive
Effi­
ciency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
PFC-31-10
C4F10
2,600.0
0.36
1.71e-10
6870
8.44e-10
9200
5.08e-12
7420
5.75e-12
9320
6.02e-12
11,000
Perfluorocyclopentene
c-C5F8
31.0 days
0.08f
1.71e-13
7
1.71e-13
2
1.37e-15
2
1.92e-16
<1
1.40e-16
<1
PFC-41-12
n-C5F12
4,100.0
0.41
1.58e-10
6350
7.84e-10
8550
4.69e-12
6860
5.33e-12
8650
5.62e-12
10,300
PFC-51-14
n-C6F14
3,100.0
0.44
1.47e-10
5890
7.26e-10
7910
4.35e-12
6370
4.94e-12
8010
5.19e-12
9490
PFC-61-16
n-C7F16
3,000.0
0.50
1.45e-10
5830
7.17e-10
7820
4.31e-12
6290
4.88e-12
7920
5.13e-12
9380
PFC-71-18
C8F18
3,000.0
0.55
1.42e-10
5680
6.99e-10
7620
4.20e-12
6130
4.76e-12
7710
5.00e-12
9140
PFC-91-18
C10F18
2,000.0
0.55
1.34e-10
5390
6.59e-10
7190
3.98e-12
5820
4.49e-12
7290
4.68e-12
8570
Perfluorodecalin (cis)
Z-C10F18
2,000.0
0.56
1.35e-10
5430
6.64e-10
7240
4.01e-12
5860
4.52e-12
7340
4.72e-12
8630
Perfluorodecalin (trans)
E-C10F18
2,000.0
0.48
1.18e-10
4720
5.77e-10
6290
3.48e-12
5090
3.93e-12
6380
4.10e-12
7500
PFC-1114
CF2=CF2
1.1 days
0.002
2.68e-16
<1
2.68e-16
<1
2.13e-18
<1
3.00e-19
<1
2.20e-19
<1
PFC-1216
CF3CF=CF2
4.9 days
0.01
6.42e-15
<1
6.42e-15
<1
5.11e-17
<1
7.21e-18
<1
5.27e-18
<1
Perfluorobuta-1,3-diene
CF2=CFCF=CF2
1.1 days
0.003
3.29e-16
<1
3.29e-16
<1
2.61e-18
<1
3.69e-19
<1
2.70e-19
<1
Perfluorobut-1-ene
CF3CF2CF=CF2
6.0 days
0.02
8.38e-15
<1
8.38e-15
<1
6.67e-17
<1
9.41e-18
<1
6.88e-18
<1
Perfluorobut-2-ene
CF3CF=CFCF3
31.0 days
0.07
1.62e-13
6
1.62e-13
2
1.30e-15
2
1.82e-16
<1
1.33e-16
<1
Halogenated Alcohols and Ethers
HFE-125
CHF2OCF3
119.0
0.41
3.10e-10
12,400
1.14e-09
12,400
8.91e-12
13,000
8.14e-12
13,200
5.97e-12
10,900
HFE-134 (HG-00)
CHF2OCHF2
24.4
0.44
2.90e-10
11,600
5.10e-10
5560
7.42e-12
10,800
3.02e-12
4900
7.83e-13
1430
HFE-143a
CH3OCF3
4.8
0.18
4.72e-11
1890
4.80e-11
523
6.95e-13
1020
6.66e-14
108
3.99e-14
73
HFE-227ea
CF3CHFOCF3
51.6
0.44
2.22e-10
8900
5.92e-10
6450
6.15e-12
8980
4.22e-12
6850
1.98e-12
3630
HCFE-235ca2 (enflurane)
CHF2OCF2CHFCl
4.3
0.41
5.30e-11
2120
5.35e-11
583
7.36e-13
1080
7.14e-14
116
4.44e-14
81
HCFE-235da2 (isoflurane)
CHF2OCHClCF3
3.5
0.42
4.49e-11
1800
4.50e-11
491
5.62e-13
822
5.72e-14
93
3.73e-14
68
HFE-236ca
CHF2OCF2CHF2
20.8
0.56g
2.42e-10
9710
3.89e-10
4240
6.03e-12
8820
2.10e-12
3400
4.98e-13
912
HFE-236ea2 (desflurane)
CHF2OCHFCF3
10.8
0.45
1.39e-10
5550
1.64e-10
1790
2.93e-12
4280
4.64e-13
753
1.42e-13
260
HFE-236fa
CF3CH2OCF3
7.5
0.36
8.35e-11
3350
8.98e-11
979
1.53e-12
2240
1.68e-13
273
7.54e-14
138
HFE-245cb2
CF3CF2OCH3
4.9
0.33
5.90e-11
2360
6.00e-11
654
8.77e-13
1280
8.40e-14
136
4.99e-14
91
HFE-245fa1
CHF2CH2OCF3
6.6
0.31
7.22e-11
2900
7.59e-11
828
1.25e-12
1820
1.27e-13
206
6.35e-14
116
HFE-245fa2
CHF2OCH2CF3
5.5
0.36
7.25e-11
2910
7.45e-11
812
1.15e-12
1670
1.10e-13
179
6.21e-14
114
2,2,3,3,3-Pentafluoropropan-1-ol
CF3CF2CH2OH
0.3
0.14
1.72e-12
69
1.72e-12
19
1.42e-14
21
1.95e-15
3
1.42e-15
3
HFE-254cb1
CH3OCF2CHF2
2.5
0.26
2.76e-11
1110
2.76e-11
301
2.99e-13
438
3.34e-14
54
2.28e-14
42
HFE-263fb2
CF3CH2OCH3
23.0 days
0.04
1.22e-13
5
1.22e-13
1
9.72e-16
1
1.37e-16
<1
9.98e-17
<1
HFE-263m1
CF3OCH2CH3
0.4
0.13
2.70e-12
108
2.70e-12
29
2.25e-14
33
3.06e-15
5
2.22e-15
4
3,3,3-Trifluoropropan-1-ol
CF3CH2CH2OH
12.0 days
0.02
3.57e-14
1
3.57e-14
<1
2.85e-16
<1
4.01e-17
<1
2.93e-17
<1
HFE-329mcc2
CHF2CF2OCF2CF3
22.5
0.53
1.68e-10
6720
2.81e-10
3070
4.23e-12
6180
1.59e-12
2580
3.93e-13
718
HFE-338mmz1
(CF3)2CHOCHF2
21.2
0.44
1.48e-10
5940
2.40e-10
2620
3.70e-12
5410
1.31e-12
2130
3.14e-13
575
(continued on next page)
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
=== PAGE 77 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
735
Acronym, Common Name or Chemical Name
Chemical Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radia­
tive
Effi­
ciency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
HFE-338mcf2
CF3CH2OCF2CF3
7.5
0.44
7.93e-11
3180
8.52e-11
929
1.45e-12
2120
1.60e-13
259
7.16e-14
131
Sevoflurane (HFE-347mmz1)
(CF3)2CHOCH2F
2.2
0.32
1.98e-11
795
1.98e-11
216
2.06e-13
302
2.37e-14
38
1.64e-14
30
HFE-347mcc3 (HFE-7000)
CH3OCF2CF2CF3
5.0
0.35
4.78e-11
1910
4.86e-11
530
7.18e-13
1050
6.87e-14
111
4.05e-14
74
HFE-347mcf2
CHF2CH2OCF2CF3
6.6
0.42
7.45e-11
2990
7.83e-11
854
1.29e-12
1880
1.31e-13
212
6.55e-14
120
HFE-347pcf2
CHF2CF2OCH2CF3
6.0
0.48h
7.86e-11
3150
8.15e-11
889
1.30e-12
1900
1.27e-13
206
6.81e-14
124
HFE-347mmy1
(CF3)2CFOCH3
3.7
0.32
3.32e-11
1330
3.33e-11
363
4.27e-13
624
4.28e-14
69
2.76e-14
51
HFE-356mec3
CH3OCF2CHFCF3
3.8
0.30
3.53e-11
1410
3.55e-11
387
4.60e-13
673
4.58e-14
74
2.94e-14
54
HFE-356mff2
CF3CH2OCH2CF3
105.0 
days
0.17
1.54e-12
62
1.54e-12
17
1.26e-14
18
1.74e-15
3
1.26e-15
2
HFE-356pcf2
CHF2CH2OCF2CHF2
5.7
0.37
6.40e-11
2560
6.59e-11
719
1.03e-12
1500
9.97e-14
162
5.50e-14
101
HFE-356pcf3
CHF2OCH2CF2CHF2
3.5
0.38
4.08e-11
1640
4.09e-11
446
5.11e-13
747
5.20e-14
84
3.39e-14
62
HFE-356pcc3
CH3OCF2CF2CHF2
3.8
0.32
3.77e-11
1510
3.79e-11
413
4.91e-13
718
4.89e-14
79
3.14e-14
57
HFE-356mmz1
(CF3)2CHOCH3
97.1 days
0.15
1.25e-12
50
1.25e-12
14
1.02e-14
15
1.41e-15
2
1.02e-15
2
HFE-365mcf3
CF3CF2CH2OCH3
19.3 days
0.05
8.51e-14
3
8.51e-14
<1
6.80e-16
<1
9.56e-17
<1
6.99e-17
<1
HFE-365mcf2
CF3CF2OCH2CH3
0.6
0.26i
5.35e-12
215
5.35e-12
58
4.53e-14
66
6.10e-15
10
4.40e-15
8
HFE-374pc2
CHF2CF2OCH2CH3
5.0
0.30
5.65e-11
2260
5.75e-11
627
8.48e-13
1240
8.12e-14
132
4.79e-14
88
4,4,4-Trifluorobutan-1-ol
CF3(CH2)2CH2OH
4.0 days
0.01
1.73e-15
<1
1.73e-15
<1
1.38e-17
<1
1.94e-18
<1
1.42e-18
<1
2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5-Octafluorocyclopentanol
-(CF2)4CH(OH)-
0.3
0.16
1.18e-12
47
1.18e-12
13
9.67e-15
14
1.33e-15
2
9.69e-16
2
HFE-43-10pccc124 (H-Galden 1040x, HG-11)
CHF2OCF2OC2F4OCHF2
13.5
1.02
2.00e-10
8010
2.58e-10
2820
4.52e-12
6600
9.46e-13
1530
2.38e-13
436
HFE-449s1 (HFE-7100)
C4F9OCH3
4.7
0.36
3.80e-11
1530
3.86e-11
421
5.54e-13
809
5.32e-14
86
3.21e-14
59
n-HFE-7100
n-C4F9OCH3
4.7
0.42
4.39e-11
1760
4.45e-11
486
6.39e-13
934
6.14e-14
99
3.70e-14
68
i-HFE-7100
i-C4F9OCH3
4.7
0.35
3.68e-11
1480
3.73e-11
407
5.35e-13
783
5.14e-14
83
3.10e-14
57
HFE-569sf2 (HFE-7200)
C4F9OC2H5
0.8
0.30
5.21e-12
209
5.21e-12
57
4.52e-14
66
5.97e-15
10
4.29e-15
8
n-HFE-7200
n-C4F9OC2H5
0.8
0.35i
5.92e-12
237
5.92e-12
65
5.14e-14
75
6.78e-15
11
4.87e-15
9
i-HFE-7200
i-C4F9OC2H5
0.8
0.24
4.06e-12
163
4.06e-12
44
3.52e-14
52
4.65e-15
8
3.34e-15
6
HFE-236ca12 (HG-10)
CHF2OCF2OCHF2
25.0
0.65
2.75e-10
11,000
4.91e-10
5350
7.06e-12
10,300
2.94e-12
4770
7.75e-13
1420
HFE-338pcc13 (HG-01)
CHF2OCF2CF2OCHF2
12.9
0.86
2.10e-10
8430
2.67e-10
2910
4.69e-12
6860
9.28e-13
1500
2.42e-13
442
1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoropropan-2-ol
(CF3)2CHOH
1.9
0.26
1.67e-11
668
1.67e-11
182
1.66e-13
243
1.97e-14
32
1.38e-14
25
HG-02
HF2C–(OCF2CF2)2–
OCF2H
12.9
1.24i
1.97e-10
7900
2.50e-10
2730
4.40e-12
6430
8.70e-13
1410
2.27e-13
415
HG-03
HF2C–(OCF2CF2)3–
OCF2H
12.9
1.76i
2.06e-10
8270
2.62e-10
2850
4.60e-12
6730
9.10e-13
1480
2.37e-13
434
HG-20
HF2C–(OCF2)2–OCF2H
25.0
0.92i
2.73e-10
10,900
4.86e-10
5300
7.00e-12
10,200
2.91e-12
4730
7.68e-13
1400
HG-21
HF2C–OCF2CF2OC­
F2OCF2O–CF2H
13.5
1.71i
2.76e-10
11,100
3.57e-10
3890
6.23e-12
9110
1.31e-12
2120
3.29e-13
602
(continued on next page)
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
=== PAGE 78 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
736
Acronym, Common Name or Chemical Name
Chemical Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radia­
tive
Effi­
ciency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
HG-30
HF2C–(OCF2)3–OCF2H
25.0
1.65i
3.77e-10
15,100
6.73e-10
7330
9.68e-12
14,100
4.03e-12
6530
1.06e-12
1940
1-Ethoxy-1,1,2,2,3,3,3-heptafluoropropane
CF3CF2CF2OCH2CH3
0.8
0.28i
5.56e-12
223
5.56e-12
61
4.80e-14
70
6.36e-15
10
4.57e-15
8
Fluoroxene
CF3CH2OCH=CH2
3.6 days
0.01i
4.97e-15
<1
4.97e-15
<1
3.95e-17
<1
5.58e-18
<1
4.08e-18
<1
1,1,2,2-Tetrafluoro-1-(fluoromethoxy)ethane
CH2FOCF2CF2H
6.2
0.34i
7.68e-11
3080
7.99e-11
871
1.29e-12
1880
1.28e-13
207
6.68e-14
122
2-Ethoxy-3,3,4,4,5-pentafluorotetrahydro-2,5-bis[1,2,2,2-
tetrafluoro-1-(trifluoromethyl)ethyl]-furan
C12H5F19O2
1.0
0.49j
5.09e-12
204
5.09e-12
56
4.53e-14
66
5.86e-15
10
4.19e-15
8
Fluoro(methoxy)methane
CH3OCH2F
73.0 days
0.07g
1.15e-12
46
1.15e-12
13
9.34e-15
14
1.30e-15
2
9.46e-16
2
Difluoro(methoxy)methane
CH3OCHF2
1.1
0.17g
1.32e-11
528
1.32e-11
144
1.18e-13
173
1.52e-14
25
1.08e-14
20
Fluoro(fluoromethoxy)methane
CH2FOCH2F
0.9
0.19g
1.20e-11
479
1.20e-11
130
1.05e-13
153
1.37e-14
22
9.84e-15
18
Difluoro(fluoromethoxy)methane
CH2FOCHF2
3.3
0.30g
5.65e-11
2260
5.66e-11
617
6.88e-13
1010
7.11e-14
115
4.69e-14
86
Trifluoro(fluoromethoxy)methane
CH2FOCF3
4.4
0.33g
6.82e-11
2730
6.89e-11
751
9.59e-13
1400
9.27e-14
150
5.72e-14
105
HG’-01
CH3OCF2CF2OCH3
2.0
0.29
2.03e-11
815
2.03e-11
222
2.06e-13
301
2.42e-14
39
1.68e-14
31
HG’-02
CH3O(CF2CF2O)2CH3
2.0
0.56
2.16e-11
868
2.16e-11
236
2.19e-13
320
2.57e-14
42
1.79e-14
33
HG’-03
CH3O(CF2CF2O)3CH3
2.0
0.76
2.03e-11
812
2.03e-11
221
2.05e-13
299
2.41e-14
39
1.67e-14
31
HFE-329me3
CF3CFHCF2OCF3
40.0
0.48
1.79e-10
7170
4.17e-10
4550
4.85e-12
7090
2.89e-12
4690
1.12e-12
2040
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,7-Undecafluoroheptan-1-ol
CF3(CF2)4CH2CH2OH
20.0 days
0.06
3.91e-14
2
3.91e-14
<1
3.12e-16
<1
4.39e-17
<1
3.21e-17
<1
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,9,9,9-Pentadecafluorononan-1-ol
CF3(CF2)6CH2CH2OH
20.0 days
0.07
3.00e-14
1
3.00e-14
<1
2.40e-16
<1
3.37e-17
<1
2.46e-17
<1
3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,9,9,10,10,11,11,11-Non­
adecafluoroundecan-1-ol
CF3(CF2)8CH2CH2OH
20.0 days
0.05
1.72e-14
<1
1.72e-14
<1
1.37e-16
<1
1.93e-17
<1
1.41e-17
<1
2-Chloro-1,1,2-trifluoro-1-methoxyethane
CH3OCF2CHFCl
1.4
0.21
1.12e-11
449
1.12e-11
122
1.05e-13
153
1.31e-14
21
9.24e-15
17
PFPMIE (perfluoropolymethylisopropyl ether)
CF3OCF(CF3)
CF2OCF2OCF3
800.0
0.65
1.87e-10
7500
8.90e-10
9710
5.52e-12
8070
6.11e-12
9910
6.15e-12
11,300
HFE-216
CF3OCF=CF2
8.4 days
0.02
1.92e-14
<1
1.92e-14
<1
1.53e-16
<1
2.15e-17
<1
1.58e-17
<1
Trifluoromethyl formate
HCOOCF3
3.5
0.31i
5.37e-11
2150
5.39e-11
588
6.73e-13
984
6.85e-14
111
4.47e-14
82
Perfluoroethyl formate
HCOOCF2CF3
3.5
0.44i
5.30e-11
2130
5.32e-11
580
6.64e-13
971
6.76e-14
110
4.41e-14
81
Perfluoropropyl formate
HCOOCF2CF2CF3
2.6
0.50i
3.45e-11
1380
3.45e-11
376
3.80e-13
555
4.19e-14
68
2.85e-14
52
Perfluorobutyl formate
HCOOCF2CF2CF2CF3
3.0
0.56i
3.59e-11
1440
3.59e-11
392
4.19e-13
613
4.45e-14
72
2.97e-14
54
2,2,2-Trifluoroethyl formate
HCOOCH2CF3
0.4
0.16i
3.07e-12
123
3.07e-12
33
2.55e-14
37
3.48e-15
6
2.52e-15
5
3,3,3-Trifluoropropyl formate
HCOOCH2CH2CF3
0.3
0.13i
1.60e-12
64
1.60e-12
17
1.31e-14
19
1.80e-15
3
1.31e-15
2
1,2,2,2-Tetrafluoroethyl formate
HCOOCHFCF3
3.2
0.35i
4.30e-11
1720
4.31e-11
470
5.17e-13
755
5.39e-14
87
3.57e-14
65
1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoropropan-2-yl formate
HCOOCH(CF3)2
3.2
0.33i
3.05e-11
1220
3.05e-11
333
3.66e-13
535
3.81e-14
62
2.53e-14
46
Perfluorobutyl acetate
CH3COOCF2CF2CF2CF3
21.9 days
0.12i
1.52e-13
6
1.52e-13
2
1.21e-15
2
1.71e-16
<1
1.25e-16
<1
Perfluoropropyl acetate
CH3COOCF2CF2CF3
21.9 days
0.11i
1.59e-13
6
1.59e-13
2
1.27e-15
2
1.78e-16
<1
1.30e-16
<1
Perfluoroethyl acetate
CH3COOCF2CF3
21.9 days
0.10i
1.89e-13
8
1.89e-13
2
1.51e-15
2
2.12e-16
<1
1.55e-16
<1
Trifluoromethyl acetate
CH3COOCF3
21.9 days
0.07i
1.90e-13
8
1.90e-13
2
1.52e-15
2
2.14e-16
<1
1.56e-16
<1
(continued on next page)
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
=== PAGE 79 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
737
Acronym, Common Name or Chemical Name
Chemical Formula
Lifetime
(Years)
Radia­
tive
Effi­
ciency
(W m–2
ppb–1)
AGWP
20-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
20-year
AGWP
100-year
(W m–2
yr kg–1)
GWP
100-year
AGTP
20-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
20-year
AGTP
50-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
50-year
AGTP
100-year
(K kg–1)
GTP
100-year
Methyl carbonofluoridate
FCOOCH3
1.8
0.07i
8.74e-12
350
8.74e-12
95
8.60e-14
126
1.03e-14
17
7.21e-15
13
1,1-Difluoroethyl carbonofluoridate
FCOOCF2CH3
0.3
0.17i
2.46e-12
99
2.46e-12
27
2.02e-14
30
2.78e-15
5
2.02e-15
4
1,1-Difluoroethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
CF3COOCF2CH3
0.3
0.27i
2.83e-12
113
2.83e-12
31
2.33e-14
34
3.20e-15
5
2.32e-15
4
Ethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
CF3COOCH2CH3
21.9 days
0.05i
1.26e-13
5
1.26e-13
1
1.00e-15
1
1.41e-16
<1
1.03e-16
<1
2,2,2-Trifluoroethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
CF3COOCH2CF3
54.8 days
0.15i
6.27e-13
25
6.27e-13
7
5.06e-15
7
7.07e-16
1
5.15e-16
<1
Methyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
CF3COOCH3
0.6
0.18i
4.80e-12
192
4.80e-12
52
4.08e-14
60
5.47e-15
9
3.95e-15
7
Methyl 2,2-difluoroacetate
HCF2COOCH3
40.1 days
0.05i
3.00e-13
12
3.00e-13
3
2.41e-15
4
3.38e-16
<1
2.47e-16
<1
Difluoromethyl 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
CF3COOCHF2
0.3
0.24i
2.48e-12
99
2.48e-12
27
2.04e-14
30
2.81e-15
5
2.04e-15
4
2,2,3,3,4,4,4-Heptafluorobutan-1-ol
C3F7CH2OH
0.6
0.20
3.10e-12
124
3.10e-12
34
2.61e-14
38
3.52e-15
6
2.55e-15
5
1,1,2-Trifluoro-2-(trifluoromethoxy)-ethane
CHF2CHFOCF3
9.8
0.35
9.91e-11
3970
1.14e-10
1240
2.03e-12
2960
2.88e-13
467
9.74e-14
178
1-Ethoxy-1,1,2,3,3,3-hexafluoropropane
CF3CHFCF2OCH2CH3
0.4
0.19
2.14e-12
86
2.14e-12
23
1.77e-14
26
2.43e-15
4
1.76e-15
3
1,1,1,2,2,3,3-Heptafluoro-3-(1,2,2,2-
tetrafluoroethoxy)-propane
CF3CF2CF2OCHFCF3
67.0
0.58
1.98e-10
7940
5.95e-10
6490
5.57e-12
8140
4.29e-12
6960
2.39e-12
4380
2,2,3,3-Tetrafluoro-1-propanol
CHF2CF2CH2OH
91.3 days
0.11
1.19e-12
48
1.19e-12
13
9.72e-15
14
1.35e-15
2
9.79e-16
2
2,2,3,4,4,4-Hexafluoro-1-butanol
CF3CHFCF2CH2OH
94.9 days
0.19
1.56e-12
63
1.56e-12
17
1.27e-14
19
1.76e-15
3
1.28e-15
2
2,2,3,3,4,4,4-Heptafluoro-1-butanol
CF3CF2CF2CH2OH
0.3
0.16
1.49e-12
60
1.49e-12
16
1.23e-14
18
1.69e-15
3
1.23e-15
2
1,1,2,2-Tetrafluoro-3-methoxy-propane
CHF2CF2CH2OCH3
14.2 days
0.03
4.82e-14
2
4.82e-14
<1
3.84e-16
<1
5.41e-17
<1
3.96e-17
<1
perfluoro-2-methyl-3-pentanone
CF3CF2C(O)CF(CF3)2
7.0 days
0.03
9.14e-15
<1
9.14e-15
<1
7.27e-17
<1
1.03e-17
<1
7.51e-18
<1
3,3,3-Trifluoro-propanal
CF3CH2CHO
2.0 days
0.004
9.86e-16
<1
9.86e-16
<1
7.84e-18
<1
1.11e-18
<1
8.10e-19
<1
2-Fluoroethanol
CH2FCH2OH
20.4 days
0.02
8.07e-14
3
8.07e-14
<1
6.45e-16
<1
9.07e-17
<1
6.63e-17
<1
2,2-Difluoroethanol
CHF2CH2OH
40.0 days
0.04
2.78e-13
11
2.78e-13
3
2.23e-15
3
3.12e-16
<1
2.28e-16
<1
2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol
CF3CH2OH
0.3
0.10
1.83e-12
73
1.83e-12
20
1.50e-14
22
2.07e-15
3
1.50e-15
3
1,1’-Oxybis[2-(difluoromethoxy)-1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethane
HCF2O(CF2CF2O)2CF2H
26.0
1.15k
2.47e-10
9910
4.51e-10
4920
6.38e-12
9320
2.75e-12
4460
7.45e-13
1360
1,1,3,3,4,4,6,6,7,7,9,9,10,10,12,12-hexa­
decafluoro-2,5,8,11-Tetraoxadodecane
HCF2O(CF2CF2O)3CF2H
26.0
1.43k
2.26e-10
9050
4.12e-10
4490
5.83e-12
8520
2.51e-12
4080
6.81e-13
1250
1,1,3,3,4,4,6,6,7,7,9,9,10,10,12,12,13,13,15,15-eico­
safluoro-2,5,8,11,14-Pentaoxapentadecane
HCF2O(CF2CF2O)4CF2H
26.0
1.46k
1.83e-10
7320
3.33e-10
3630
4.71e-12
6880
2.03e-12
3300
5.50e-13
1010
Table 8.A.1 (continued)
Notes:
For CH4 we estimate an uncertainty of ±30% and ±40% for 20- and 100-year time horizon, respectively (for 90% uncertainty range). The uncertainty is dominated by AGWP for CO2 and indirect effects. The uncertainty in GWP for N2O is estimated to ±20% and 
±30% for 20- and 100-year time horizon, with the largest contributions from CO2. The uncertainty in GWP for HFC-134a is estimated to ±25% and ±35% for 20- and 100-year time horizons while for CFC-11 the GWP the corresponding numbers are approximately 
±20% and ±35% (not accounting for the indirect effects). For CFC-12 the corresponding numbers are ±20 and ±30. The uncertainties estimated for HFC-134a and CFC-11 are assessed as representative for most other gases with similar or longer lifetimes. For 
shorter-lived gases, the uncertainties will be larger. For GTP, few estimates are available in the literature. The uncertainty is assessed to be of the order of ±75% for the methane GTP100.
*	 No single lifetime can be given. The impulse response function for CO2 from Joos et al. (2013) has been used. See also Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11.
†	 Perturbation lifetime is used in calculation of metrics, not the lifetime of the atmospheric burden.
(continued on next page)
=== PAGE 80 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
738
Table 8.A.1 Notes (continued) 
‡	 Metric values for CH4 of fossil origin include the oxidation to CO2  (based on Boucher et al., 2009). In applications of these values, inclusion of the CO2  effect of fossil methane must be done with caution to avoid any double-counting because CO2  emissions 
numbers are often based on total carbon content. Methane values without the CO2  effect from fossil methane are thus appropriate for fossil methane sources for which the carbon has been accounted for elsewhere, or for biospheric methane sources for which 
there is abalance between CO2  taken up by the biosphere and CO2  produced from CH4 oxidization. The addition effect on GWP and GTP represents lower limits from Boucher et al. (2009) and assume 50% of the carbon is deposited as formaldehyde to the 
surface and is then lost. The upper limit in Boucher et al. (2009) made the assumption that this deposited formaldehyde was subsequently further oxidized to CO2 .
a	 RE is unchanged since AR4.
b	 RE is unchanged since AR4 except the absolute forcing is increased by a factor of 1.04 to account for the change in the recommended RE of CFC-11.
c	
Based on Rajakumar et al. (2006) (lifetime correction factor has been applied to account for non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
d	 Based on instantaneous RE from Baasandorj et al. (2010); Baasandorj et al. (2011) (correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
e	 Based on instantaneous RE from ab initio study of Bravo et al. (2010) (a factor 1.10 has been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment).
f	
Based on average instantaneous RE reported in literature (Vasekova et al., 2006; Bravo et al., 2010) (correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
g	 Based on instantaneous RE from ab initio studies of Blowers et al. (2007, 2008)(correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
h	 Based on instantaneous RE from Heathfield et al. (1998) (correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
i	
Note that calculation of RE is based on calculated (ab initio) absorption cross-section and uncertainties are therefore larger than for calculations using experimental absorption cross section.
j	
Based on instantaneous RE from Javadi et al. (2007) (correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
k	 Based on instantaneous RE from Andersen et al. (2010) (correction factors have been applied to account for stratospheric temperature adjustment and non-homogeneous horizontal and vertical mixing).
The GTP values are calculated with a temperature impulse response function taken from Boucher and Reddy (2008). See also Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11.
=== PAGE 81 ===
8
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing	
Chapter 8
739
Table 8.A.2 |  Halocarbon indirect GWPs from ozone depletion using the EESC-based 
method described in WMO (2011), adapted from Daniel et al. (1995). A radiative forcing 
in year 2011 of –0.15 (–0.30 to 0.0) W m–2 relative to preindustrial times is used (see 
Section 8.3.3). Uncertainty on the indirect AGWPs due to the ozone forcing uncertainty 
is ±100%.
Gas
   GWP100
CFC-11
–2640
CFC-12
–2100
CFC-113
–2150
CFC-114
–914
CFC-115
–223
HCFC-22
–98
HCFC-123
–37
HCFC-124
–46
HCFC-141b
–261
HCFC-142b
–152
CH3CCl3
–319
CCl4
–2110
 CH3Br
–1250
Halon-1211
–19,000
Halon-1301
–44,500
Halon-2402
–32,000
HCFC-225ca
–40
HCFC-225cb
–60
GWP
GTP
H = 20
H = 100
H = 20
H = 100
NOX East Asiaa
6.4 (±38.1)
–5.3 (±11.5)
–55.6 (±23.8)
–1.3 (±2.1)
NOX EU + North Africaa
–39.4 (±17.5)
–15.6 (±5.8)
–48.0 (±14.9)
–2.5 (±1.3)
NOX North Americaa
–2.4 (±30.3)
–8.2 (±10.3)
–61.9 (±27.8)
–1.7 (±2.1)
NOX South Asiaa
–40.7 (±88.3)
–25.3 (±29.0)
–124.6 (±67.4)
–4.6 (±5.1)
NOX four above regionsa
–15.9 (±32.7)
–11.6 (±10.7)
–62.1 (±26.2)
–2.2 (±2.1)
Mid-latitude NOxc
–43 to +23
–18 to +1.6
–55 to –37
–2.9 to –0.02
Tropical NOx
c
43 to 130
–28 to –10
–260 to –220
–6.6 to –5.4
NOX globalb
19
–11
–87
–2.9
NOX globald
–108 ± 35
–335 ± 110
–560 ± 279
–31 ± 10
–95 ± 31
–159 ± 79
Table 8.A.3 |  GWP and GTP for NOX from surface sources for time horizons of 20 and 100 years from the literature. All values are on a per kilogram of nitrogen basis. Uncertainty 
for numbers from Fry et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2013) refer to 1-s. For the reference gas CO2, RE and IRF from AR4 are used in the calculations. The GWP100 and GTP100 values 
can be scaled by 0.94 and 0.92, respectively, to account for updated values for the reference gas CO2. For 20 years the changes are negligible.
Notes:
a	 Fry et al. (2012) (updated by including stratospheric H2O) and Collins et al. (2013).
b	 Fuglestvedt et al. (2010); based on Wild et al. (2001).
c	
Fuglestvedt et al. (2010).
d	 Shindell et al. (2009). Three values are given: First, without aerosols, second, direct aerosol effect included (sulfate and nitrate), third, direct and indirect aerosol effects included. Uncertainty 
ranges from Shindell et al. (2009) are given for 95% confidence levels.
=== PAGE 82 ===
8
Chapter 8	
Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing
740
GWP
GTP
H = 20
H = 100
H = 20
H = 100
CO East Asiaa
5.4 (±1.7)
1.8 (±0.6)
3.5 (±1.3)
0.26 (±0.12)
CO EU + North Africaa
4.9 (±1.5)
1.6 (±0.5)
3.2 (±1.2)
0.24 (±0.11)
CO North Americaa
5.6 (±1.8)
1.8 (±0.6)
3.7 (±1.3)
0.27 (±0.12)
CO South Asiaa
5.7 (±1.3)
1.8 (±0.4)
3.4 (±1.0)
0.27 (±0.10)
CO four regions abovea
5.4 (±1.6)
1.8 (±0.5)
3.5 (±1.2)
0.26 (±0.11)
CO globalb
6 to 9.3
2 to 3.3
3.7 to 6.1
0.29 to 0.55
CO globalc
7.8 ± 2.0
11.4 ± 2.9
18.6 ± 8.3
2.2 ± 0.6
3.3 ± 0.8
5.3 ± 2.3
GWP
GTP
H = 20
H = 100
H = 20
H = 100
BC total, globalc
3200 (270 to 6200)
900 (100 to 1700)
920 (95 to 2400)
130 (5 to 340)
BC (four regions)d
1200 ± 720
345 ± 207
420 ± 190
56 ± 25
BC globala
1600
460
470
64
BC aerosol–radiation interaction +albedo, globalb
2900 ± 1500
830 ± 440
OC globala
–240
–69
–71
–10
OC globalb
–160 (–60 to –320)
–46 (–18 to –19)
OC (4 regions)d
–160 ± 68
–46 ± 20 
–55 ± 16
–7.3±2.1
GWP
GTP
H = 20
H = 100
H = 20
H = 100
VOC East Asiaa
16.3 (±6.4)
5.0 (±2.1)
8.4 (±4.6)
0.7 (±0.4)
VOC EU + North Africaa
18.0 (±8.5)
5.6 (±2.8)
9.5 (±6.5)
0.8 (±0.5)
VOC North Americaa
16.2 (±9.2)
5.0 (±3.0)
8.6 (±6.4)
0.7 (±0.5)
VOC South Asiaa
27.8 (±5.6)
8.8 (±1.9)
15.7 (±5.0)
1.3 (±0.5)
VOC four regions above
18.7 (±7.5)
5.8 (±2.5)
10.0 (±5.7)
0.9 (±0.5)
VOC globalb
14
4.5
7.5
0.66
Table 8.A.4 |  GWP and GTP for CO for time horizons of 20 and 100 years from the literature. Uncertainty for numbers from Fry et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2013) refer to 1-s. 
For the reference gas CO2, RE and IRF from AR4 are used in the calculations. The GWP100 and GTP100 values can be scaled by 0.94 and 0.92, respectively, to account for updated 
values for the reference gas CO2. For 20 years the changes are negligible.
Notes:
a	 Fry et al. (2012) (updated by including stratospheric H2O) and Collins et al. (2013).
b	 Fuglestvedt et al. (2010).
c	
Shindell et al. (2009). Three values are given: First, without aerosols, second, direct aerosol effect included, third, direct and indirect aerosol effects included. Uncertainty ranges from Shindell et 
al. (2009) are given for 95% confidence levels.
Table 8.A.5 |  GWP and GTP for VOCs for time horizons of 20 and 100 years from the literature. Uncertainty for numbers from Fry et al. (2012) and Collins et al. (2013) refer to
1-s. For the reference gas CO2, RE and IRF from AR4 are used in the calculations. The GWP100 and GTP100 values can be scaled by 0.94 and 0.92, respectively, to account for updated 
values for the reference gas CO2. For 20 years the changes are negligible.
Notes:
a	 Fry et al. (2012) (updated by including stratospheric H2O) and Collins et al. (2013).
b	 Fuglestvedt et al. (2010) based on Collins et al. (2002).
The values are given on a per kilogram of C basis.
Table 8.A.6 | GWP and GTP from the literature for BC and OC for time horizons of 20 and 100 years. For the reference gas CO2, RE and IRF from AR4 are used in the calculations. 
The GWP100 and GTP100 values can be scaled by 0.94 and 0.92, respectively, to account for updated values for the reference gas CO2. For 20 years the changes are negligible.
Notes:
a	 Fuglestvedt et al. (2010).
b	 Bond et al. (2011). Uncertainties for OC are asymmetric and are presented as ranges.
c	
Bond et al. (2013). Metric values are given for total effect.
d	 Collins et al. (2013). The four regions are East Asia, EU + North Africa, North America and South Asia (as also given in Fry et al., 2012). Only aerosol-radiation interaction is included.
