=== PAGE 1 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         1  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for 
Fish Processing 
Introduction 
The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are 
technical reference documents with general and industry-
specific examples of Good International Industry Practice 
(GIIP)1. When one or more members of the World Bank Group 
are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as 
required by their respective policies and standards. These 
industry sector EHS guidelines are designed to be used 
together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which 
provides guidance to users on common EHS issues potentially 
applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of 
multiple industry-sector guidelines may be necessary. A 
complete list of industry-sector guidelines can be found at: 
www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/EnvironmentalGuidelines 
The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and 
measures that are generally considered to be achievable in new 
facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application 
of the EHS Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the 
establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate 
timetable for achieving them. The applicability of the EHS 
Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks 
established for each project on the basis of the results of an 
environmental assessment in which site-specific variables, such 
as host country context, assimilative capacity of the 
environment, and other project factors, are taken into account. 
                                                   
1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence and foresight 
that would be reasonably expected from skilled and experienced professionals 
engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar 
circumstances globally.  The circumstances that skilled and experienced 
professionals may find when evaluating the range of pollution prevention and 
control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, 
varying levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative 
capacity as well as varying levels of financial and technical feasibility. 
The applicability of specific technical recommendations should 
be based on the professional opinion of qualified and 
experienced persons. When host country regulations differ from 
the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines, 
projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If 
less stringent levels or measures than those provided in these 
EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project 
circumstances, a full and detailed justification for any proposed 
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental 
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the 
choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of 
human health and the environment.  
Applicability 
The EHS Guidelines for Fish Processing include information 
relevant to fish processing facilities, including the post-harvest 
processing of fish, crustaceans, gastropods, cephalopods, and 
bivalves (hereafter referred to as “fish products”), originating 
from sea or freshwater catch or from farming operations in fresh 
or salt water. This document does not cover primary fishery 
activities2, or the production of fish in aquaculture. The latter is 
covered in the EHS Guidelines for Aquaculture. This document 
is organized according to the following sections: 
Section 1.0 — Industry-Specific Impacts and Management 
Section 2.0 — Performance Indicators and Monitoring  
Section 3.0 — References and Additional Sources 
Annex     A — General Description of Industry Activities
                                                   
2 Overexploitation of fish stocks is a significant global issue. It is not addressed 
in this document, however, before a fish processing plant is established, the raw 
material supply situation should be considered, particularly with respect to the 
sustainability of the resources that will be the main input. Annex B provides a 
brief discussion of sustainable fishing principles and good practices.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         2  
WORLD BANK GROUP
1.0  Industry-Specific Impacts and  
Management 
 
The following section provides a summary of EHS issues 
associated with fish processing which occur during the 
operational phase, along with recommendations for their 
management. Recommendations for the management of EHS 
issues common to most large industrial facilities during the 
construction and decommissioning phases are provided in the 
General EHS Guidelines.  
1.1 
Environment 
Environmental issues in fish processing projects primarily 
include the following:  
• 
Solid waste and by-products 
• 
Wastewater  
• 
Water consumption and management 
• 
Emissions to air and energy consumption 
Solid Waste and By-products 
Fish processing activities generate potentially large quantities of 
organic waste and by-products from inedible fish parts and 
endoskeleton shell parts from the crustacean peeling process. 
The actual proportion depends on the edible fraction of each 
species being processed. Fish waste is a rich source of 
essential amino acids, and all inedible fish waste should be 
converted into by-products (e.g. fishmeal or silage).  
Recommended prevention and control techniques to reduce the 
amount of solid waste include the following:  
• 
Encourage fishing vessels to reduce the capture of “non-
target species” to reduce the amount of waste in the by-
product line;  
• 
Design fish processing operations to enable the recovery of 
waste streams in accordance with Good Manufacturing 
Practice (GMP) and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Points (HACCP) food safety programs;  
• 
Where feasible, reprocess waste into commercial by-
products.3 Off-cuts and wastes should be recovered and 
taken to the by-product facility in time to prevent product 
deterioration. Internal organs, blood, endoskeleton parts, 
and any by-catch can be reprocessed into fish meal and 
fish oil. In cases in which reprocessing for fish meal or oil 
production is not an option, consider the lower-cost option 
of production of fish silage;4 
• 
Wastewater from fish meal plants often contains high levels 
of proteins and oils, which makes the recovery financially 
feasible. Consequently, most fish meal factories now have 
stick-water evaporation plants, where the liquid fraction 
after the press is evaporated and the proteins recovered. 
Sludge Treatment and Disposal 
The following measures reduce the volume of disposable waste 
generated from waste and wastewater treatment processes:  
• 
Sludge dewatering on sludge drying beds for small-scale 
factories and dewatering using belt presses and decanter 
centrifuges for medium and large-scale factories; 
• 
Land application (as fertilizer) of wastes from on-site 
wastewater treatment in agricultural production;  
• 
Pathogens can be destroyed during controlled anaerobic 
digestion (biogas) or aerobic treatment (composting); 
• 
Disposal of wastes in landfill if not used for biogas 
production or combustion.  
 
                                                   
3 Processing plants often outsource by-product processing to specialized 
companies that further process the waste into a dedicated fish meal product or 
produce other feed products for animals (e.g., mink fodder or fish silage). 
4 Fish silage is a product derived from the liquefaction of whole fish or parts of 
fish through the action of enzymes in the fish and additional acids. Silage can be 
used for applications similar to those of fishmeal.
=== PAGE 3 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         3  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Wastewater 
Industrial Process Wastewater 
Fish processing requires large amounts of water, primarily for 
washing and cleaning purposes, but also as media for storage 
and refrigeration of fish products before and during processing. 
In addition, water is an important lubricant and transport medium 
in the various handling and processing steps of bulk fish 
processing. Fish processing wastewater has a high organic 
content, and subsequently a high biochemical oxygen demand 
(BOD), because of the presence of blood, tissue, and dissolved 
protein. It also typically has a high content of nitrogen 
(especially if blood is present) and phosphorus.  
Detergents and disinfectants may also be present in the 
wastewater stream after application during facility cleaning 
activities. A range of chemicals is typically used for cleaning, 
including acid, alkaline, and neutral detergents, as well as 
disinfectants. The disinfectants commonly used include chlorine 
compounds, hydrogen peroxide, and formaldehyde. Other 
compounds also may be used for select activities (e.g.  
disinfection of fishmeal processing equipment).  
The following recommended methods may be used to enhance 
the removal of solid waste prior to entry into the wastewater 
stream: 
• 
Collect internal organs and other organic materials 
separately, for processing into by-products according to the 
recommendations for solid waste management above; 
• 
Design the production line so that cooling water, storm 
water, and process effluents can be kept separate to permit 
appropriate treatment options; 
• 
Conduct a dry precleaning of equipment and production 
areas before wet cleaning (e.g. rubber scraping of work 
tables and plant floor before hosing); 
• 
Establish procedures for the dry removal of offal, using dry 
vacuum systems where feasible;  
• 
Fit and use floor drains and collection channels with grids 
and screens, and / or traps, to reduce the amount of solids 
entering the wastewater; 
• 
Equip the outlets of wastewater channels with screens and 
fat traps to recover and reduce the concentration of coarse 
material and fat in the combined wastewater stream;  
• 
Avoid submersion of open products (e.g. fillets) in water, as 
soluble protein may leak out and enter the wastewater 
effluent stream; 
• 
Ensure that tanks are effectively bunded and provide 
overfilling protection on bulk storage tanks;5 
• 
Choose cleaning agents that do not have adverse impacts 
on the environment in general, or on wastewater treatment 
processes and sludge quality for agricultural application. 
Optimize their use through correct dosage and application. 
Avoid cleaners that contain active chlorine or prohibited, 
banned, or restricted chemicals.  
Process Wastewater Treatment 
Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this 
sector include grease traps, skimmers or oil water separators for 
separation of floatable solids; flow and load equalization; 
sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using clarifiers or 
settling ponds; biological treatment, typically anaerobic (if high in 
organic content) followed by aerobic treatment, for reduction of 
soluble organic matter (BOD); biological nutrient removal for 
reduction in nitrogen and phosphorus; chlorination of effluent 
when disinfection is required; dewatering and disposal of 
residuals; in some instances composting or land application of 
wastewater treatment residuals of acceptable quality may be 
possible. Additional engineering controls may be required to 
contain and neutralize nuisance odors. 
                                                   
5 Irish EPA (1996).
=== PAGE 4 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         4  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Management of industrial wastewater and examples of 
treatment approaches are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. Through use of these technologies and good 
practice techniques for wastewater management, facilities 
should meet the Guideline Values for wastewater discharge as 
indicated in the relevant table of Section 2 of this industry sector 
document.  
Other Wastewater Streams & Water Consumption 
Guidance on the management of non-contaminated wastewater 
from utility operations, non-contaminated stormwater, and 
sanitary sewage is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system 
for industrial process wastewater. Recommendations to reduce 
water consumption, especially where it may be a limited natural 
resource, are provided in the General EHS Guidelines. Specific 
water consumption recommendations for fish processing 
operations include the following: 
• 
Use enough ice to secure product quality and match ice 
production to requirements; 
• 
Improve efficiency by concentrating activities or certain 
processes on fewer days per week, if the facility or process 
is not operated at full capacity; 
• 
Improve the process lay out to facilitate cleaning and 
eliminate wet transport of wastes, thereby minimizing water 
consumption; 
• 
Dry clean with a scraper or broom before cleaning with 
water. Use efficient cleaning procedures as mentioned in 
the section “Industrial Process Wastewater” section above; 
• 
Avoid recycling contact process water. Recycling of cooling 
water, rinse water, and wastewater for some specific 
noncritical applications may be feasible as long as hygiene 
considerations are observed. 
Emissions to Air 
Odor is often the most significant form of air pollution in fish 
processing. Major sources include storage sites for processing 
waste, cooking by-products during fish meal production, fish 
drying processes, and odor emitted during filling and emptying 
of bulk tanks and silos. Fish quality may deteriorate under the 
anaerobic conditions found in onboard storage on fishing 
vessels and in the raw material silos of fish processing facilities. 
This deterioration causes the formation of odorous compounds 
such as ammonia, mercaptans, and hydrogen sulfide gas. 
 Odor Prevention 
The following recommended measures should be undertaken to 
prevent the generation of odor emissions: 
• 
Avoid processing batches of raw material that are of 
considerably lower than average quality; this will reduce 
the odor components; 
• 
Reduce the stock of raw materials, waste, and by-products 
and store this stock for short periods of time only in a cold, 
closed, well-ventilated place; 
• 
Seal by-products in covered, leak-proof containers; 
• 
Keep all working and storage areas clean and remove 
waste products immediately from the production line; 
• 
Empty and clean fat traps on a regular basis; 
• 
Cover all transfer systems, wastewater canals, and waste-
water treatment facilities to reduce the escape of foul 
odors. 
Odor Control 
The recommended odor control techniques in fish processing 
include the following: 
• 
Install condensers on all appropriate process equipment 
(e.g., cookers and evaporators) to treat air emissions for 
odor, including sulfides and mercaptans;
=== PAGE 5 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         5  
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Install biofilters as the final method of air treatment and 
acid scrubbers for ammonia removal ahead of the biofilter; 
• 
Install cyclones and filtration (fabric filters normally are 
adequate) to remove particulates; 
• 
Reduce fugitive odor sources from open doors, open 
windows, and general room ventilation through the use of 
negative pressure-controlled ventilation systems.  
Exhaust Gases 
Exhaust gas emissions (carbon dioxide [CO2], nitrogen oxides 
[NOX] and carbon monoxide [CO]) in the fish processing sector 
result from the combustion of gas and fuel oil or diesel in 
turbines, boilers, compressors and other engines for power and 
heat generation. Guidance for the management of small 
combustion source emissions with a capacity of up to 50 
megawatt thermal (MWth), including air emission standards for 
exhaust emissions, is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
For combustion source emissions with a capacity of greater than 
50 MWth refer to the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power. 
Particulates 
Particulate emissions are generally not a serious problem in the 
fish processing sector. The primary process source is the fish 
smoking process, which is relevant if the gas from this process 
is not treated effectively in the cleaning process. The 
recommended control techniques for particulate emissions 
during fish smoking include the following: 
• 
Consider use of integrated smoking units with incineration 
and heat recovery; 
• 
Clean the kiln exhaust using filters, incinerators, and / or 
wet scrubbers; 
• 
Ensure that smoke from the fish processing process is 
emitted from a stack of sufficient height; 
• 
Transfer air emissions to the boiler house for use as the 
supply air for the combustion process. This method 
requires that the boiler house be located parallel to the 
emission sources and that the capacity (supply air volume) 
matches the need for combustion process air. 
Energy Consumption and Management 
Fish processing facilities use energy to produce hot water, 
steam, and electricity for process and cleaning applications. 
Electricity is used for electrical equipment, air conditioning, 
cooling, freezing, and ice production. General recommendations 
to obtain energy efficiency through reduced heat loss, improved 
cooling efficiency, heat recovery, and increased utilization of 
energy efficient equipment are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. 
1.2 
Occupational Health and Safety 
Occupational health and safety issues that occur during the 
operational phase of fish processing projects primarily include 
the following:  
• 
Physical hazards 
• 
Biological hazards 
• 
Lifting, carrying, and repetitive work injuries 
• 
Exposure to chemicals 
• 
Exposure to heat and cold 
• 
Confined space 
• 
Exposure to noise and vibrations 
Physical hazards 
Causes of accidents in fish processing operations include falls 
caused by slippery floors and stairs; equipment safety issues 
associated with filleting knives and other sharp tools; and cuts 
from sharp edges on process equipment (e.g. stainless steel 
basins). In addition to general recommendations included in the 
General EHS Guidelines, the following are sector-specific 
recommendations for accident prevention:
=== PAGE 6 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         6  
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Provide workers with training in the proper use and 
maintenance of cutting equipment (including the use of 
machine safety devices, handling / storage and upkeep of 
knives, and emergency shutoff procedures) and personal 
protective equipment  (e.g. metallic gloves and leather 
aprons for cutting activities, and protective footwear with 
rubber soles); 
• 
Design the plant so that different activities and the flow of 
processes do not cross. In addition, clearly demarcate 
transport corridors and working areas; ensure that 
handrails are provided on platforms, ladders, and stairs; 
and use non-slip floor surfacing; 
• 
Use completely enclosed conveyer belts to protect hands 
and fingers.  
Biological hazards 
Workers involved in manual gutting, skinning, and general 
handling of fish and shellfish may develop infections and or 
allergic reactions resulting from exposure to the fish itself, or 
bacteria on the fish. Water spraying processes may result in the 
formation of aerosols with bacteria that can be inhaled. In 
addition to general recommendations included in the General 
EHS Guidelines, the following are sector-specific 
recommendations to prevent exposure to bacteria: 
• 
Consider work rotation strategies to reduce occupational 
exposure to allergens; 
• 
Wear gloves to protect hands from exposure to products, 
especially when working with seafood that is known to 
create allergic reactions (e.g. scallops and shrimp).   
Provide food-approved shielding hand creams; 
• 
Avoid aerosol-generating activities (e.g. use of compressed 
air or high-pressure water for cleaning). Where these 
activities cannot be avoided, provide proper ventilation of 
enclosed or semi-enclosed areas to reduce or eliminate 
exposure to aerosols, in addition to adequate distances 
between workers and aerosol-generating activities;  
• 
Ensure physical segregation of work and personal facilities 
to maintain worker personal hygiene.  
Lifting, Carrying, and Repetitive Work  
Fish processing activities may include a variety of situations in 
which workers can be exposed to lifting, carrying, repetitive 
work, and work posture injuries. Many of the manual operations 
in less mechanized fish processing plants include lifting heavy 
boxes of raw materials. Repetitive strain injuries may result from 
manual filleting and trimming operations. Poor working postures 
may result from the design of the workspace, furniture, 
machinery, and tools. Recommended prevention and control 
measures for these activities are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. 
Chemicals  
Exposure to chemicals (including gases and vapors) includes 
handling chemicals such as chlorine, lye, and acids that are 
related to cleaning operations and disinfection in process areas. 
In fish smoking facilities, workers could be exposed to smoke 
particles that contains potential or confirmed carcinogens such 
as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).  
Recommendations to prevent and control exposure to chemicals 
are presented in the General EHS Guidelines. Additional, 
industry-specific recommendations include:  
• 
Avoid locating smoking kilns in the same rooms as 
processing workers. Chimney exhaust systems should 
ensure that smoke is not entering the processing factory. 
Respiratory protection should be used when cleaning 
smoke ovens; 
• 
Ensure that employees handling concentrated lye, acid, 
and chlorine wear protective clothing and eyewear.
=== PAGE 7 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         7  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Heat and Cold 
Exposure to extreme heat and cold is common because fish 
processing is often conducted in air-conditioned plants under 
low temperature, even in tropical locations. Improper work 
clothes in combination with stationary work locations can result, 
or be an additional factor, in respiratory and musculoskeletal 
ailments.  
Recommendations for the management of exposure to heat and 
cold include the following: 
• 
Set the temperature in air-conditioned processing facilities, 
where stationary manual work is conducted, at a level that 
is appropriate according to temperature stress 
management procedures as noted in the General EHS 
Guidelines. Products awaiting the next processing step 
can be kept chilled without lowering the ambient 
temperature through proper use of ice, slush-ice, or water-
ice mixtures;  
• 
Equip cold stores and chill stores with strip curtains to 
avoid extensive drafts when doors are open. Ensure 
freezers can be opened from the inside;  
• 
Design air-conditioning systems for processing facilities in 
conjunction with strip curtain placement to minimize drafts;  
• 
Provide protective clothing in cold environments (e.g. 
refrigerated storage rooms). Process workers should 
always be equipped with proper working garments, 
including dry boots; 
• 
Reduce movement of processing workers between 
different temperature zones (e.g. when packing frozen 
products). 
Confined Space 
Occupational health and safety impacts associated with 
confined spaces in fish processing operations (e.g. storage 
areas, boat holds) are common to most industries, and their 
prevention and control are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. 
Noise and Vibrations  
Noise and vibration exposure may result from proximity to noisy 
machinery (e.g. compressors, automatic packing machinery, 
condensers, ventilation units, and pressurized air). 
Recommendations for noise management are discussed in the 
General EHS Guidelines.  
1.3 
Community Health and Safety  
Community health and safety impacts during the planning and 
operation phases of fish processing projects are similar to those 
of most industrial facilities, and are discussed in the General 
EHS Guidelines.  
During the planning phase, the facility should be located at an 
appropriate distance from neighbors and access roads should 
be assessed for suitable transport use. Proximity to neighbors is 
an important issue, especially for the management of odor and 
waste issues in fish processing operations.  
Community health and safety impacts during the operation 
phase are common to most industry sectors, including those 
related to noise and traffic safety from the transport of raw 
materials and finished product. These impacts are discussed in 
the General EHS Guidelines. Industry-specific issues that can 
impact the community or the public at large may include those 
associated with the potential presence of pathogens or microbial 
contaminants as well as other chemical or physical effects from 
processed fish.  
Food Safety Impacts and Management 
A food product recall brought about because of contaminated or 
adulterated food products found in commerce that are 
attributable to a specific company can damage a viable
=== PAGE 8 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         8  
WORLD BANK GROUP
business. If a company can trace its products, then recall is a 
matter of removing all foods associated with specific lot 
numbers. With a robust food safety program in place, a 
company can protect itself from product adulteration, 
contamination, and the impacts of food recalls.  
Fish processing should therefore be performed according to 
internationally recognized food safety standards consistent with 
the principles and practice of HACCP6 and Codex Alimentaria.7 
Recommended food safety principles include the following: 
• 
Respect “clean” and “dirty” zoning. Design in accordance 
with veterinary rules (e.g. surfaces are easy to clean and 
desterilize knives); 
• 
Improve the cooling chain; 
• 
Facilitate tracing parts of processed product; 
• 
Comply with veterinary regulation and precautions for 
waste and by-products; 
• 
Full institutionalization of HACCP prerequisites including: 
o 
Sanitation 
o 
Good Management Practices (GMPs) 
o 
Implement integrated pest and vector management 
programs and maximize pest and vector control 
through mechanical means(e.g. traps), and use mesh 
on doors and windows to reduce the need for 
chemical pest and vector control 
o 
Chemical control 
o 
Allergen control 
o 
Customer complaints mechanism 
o 
Traceability and recall 
 
                                                   
6 ISO (2005). 
7 FAO and WHO (1962–2005). 
2.0 Performance Indicators and 
Monitoring 
2.1 
Environment  
Emissions and Effluent Guidelines  
Tables 1 and 2 present emission and effluent guidelines for this 
sector. Guideline values for process emissions and effluents in 
this sector are indicative of good international industry practice 
as reflected in relevant standards of countries with recognized 
regulatory frameworks. These levels should be achieved, 
without dilution, at least 95 percent of the time that the plant or 
unit is operating, to be calculated as a proportion of annual 
operating hours. Deviation from these levels in consideration of 
specific, local project conditions should be justified in the 
environmental assessment.  
Effluent guidelines are applicable for direct discharges of treated 
effluents to surface waters for general use. Site-specific 
discharge levels may be established based on the availability 
and requirements of publicly operated sewage collection and 
treatment systems or, if discharged directly to surface waters, 
on the receiving water use classification as described in the 
General EHS Guidelines. 
Emissions guidelines are applicable to process emissions. 
Combustion source emissions guidelines associated with 
steam- and power-generation activities from sources with a 
capacity equal to or lower than 50 MWth are addressed in the 
General EHS Guidelines with larger power source emissions 
addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power. 
Guidance on ambient considerations based on the total load of 
emissions is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.
=== PAGE 9 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         9  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Table 1. Effluent levels for fish processing 
Pollutants 
Units 
Guideline Value 
pH 
pH 
6 – 9 
BOD5 
mg/l 
50 
COD 
mg/l 
250  
Total nitrogen  
mg/l 
10  
Total phosphorus 
mg/l 
2 
Oil and grease 
mg/l 
10 
Total suspended solids 
mg/l 
50 
Temperature increase 
°C 
<3b 
Total coliform bacteria 
MPNa / 100 ml 
400 
Active Ingredients / 
Antibiotics 
To be determined on a case specific 
basis 
Notes:  
a MPN = Most Probable Number 
b At the edge of a scientifically established mixing zone which takes into 
account ambient water quality, receiving water use, potential receptors and 
assimilative capacity 
 
Table 2. Air emission levels for fish processing. 
Pollutants 
Unit 
 Guideline Value 
Ammonia 
mg/m3 
1 
Amines and amides 
mg/m3 
5 
Hydrogen sulfide, sulfides, 
and mercaptans 
mg/m3 
2 
 
Resource Use 
Table 3 provides examples of energy and water consumption in-
dicators for various aspects of fish processing. Industry 
benchmark values are provided for comparative purposes only 
and individual projects should target continual improvement in 
these areas. 
 
 
Table 3. Energy and water consumption for 
common fish production processes 
Output per unit of product 
Unit 
Energy consumption 
per ton of raw material 
Processing of shrimps 
Freezing (contact freezer) 
Freezer (blast freezer) 
Fillet production 
Fish-meal production 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
350 
328 
350 
18 
2300 
Outputs per unit of 
product 
Units 
Water consumption per 
ton raw materialsa 
Whitefish 
Herring filleting 
Mackerel filleting 
m3/t 
m3/t 
m3/t 
5–11 
5–8 
5–8 
a UNEP: Cleaner Production: Fish Processing  
http://www.agrifood-forum.net/publications/guide/f_chp0.pdf 
 
Environmental Monitoring 
Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be 
implemented to address all activities that have been identified to 
have potentially significant impacts on the environment during 
normal operations and upset conditions. Environmental 
monitoring activities should be based on direct or indirect 
indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable 
to the particular project.  
Monitoring frequency should be sufficient to provide 
representative data for the parameter being monitored. 
Monitoring should be conducted by trained individuals following 
monitoring and record-keeping procedures and using properly 
calibrated and maintained equipment. Monitoring data should be 
analyzed and reviewed at regular intervals and compared with 
the operating standards so that any necessary corrective 
actions can be taken. Additional guidance on applicable 
sampling and analytical methods for emissions and effluents is 
provided in the General EHS Guidelines.
=== PAGE 10 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         10  
WORLD BANK GROUP
 2.2 
Occupational Health and Safety  
Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines 
Occupational health and safety performance should be 
evaluated against internationally published exposure guidelines, 
of which examples include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) 
occupational exposure guidelines and Biological Exposure 
Indices (BEIs®) published by American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH),8  the Pocket Guide 
to Chemical Hazards published by the United States National 
Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH),9 
Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs) published by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration of  the United 
States (OSHA),10 Indicative Occupational Exposure Limit Values 
published by European Union member states,11 or other similar 
sources. 
Accident and Fatality Rates 
Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among 
project workers (whether directly employed or subcontracted) to 
a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work 
time, different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Facility rates 
may be benchmarked against the performance of facilities in this 
sector in developed countries through consultation with 
published sources (e.g. US Bureau of Labor Statistics and UK 
Health and Safety Executive)12.     
Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring 
The working environment should be monitored for occupational 
hazards relevant to the specific project. Monitoring should be 
                                                   
8 Available at: http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/ 
9 Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/ 
10 Available at: 
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDAR
DS&p_id=9992 
11 Available at: http://europe.osha.eu.int/good_practice/risks/ds/oel/ 
12 Available at: http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm 
designed and implemented by accredited professionals13 as part 
of an occupational health and safety monitoring program. 
Facilities should also maintain a record of occupational 
accidents and diseases and dangerous occurrences and 
accidents. Additional guidance on occupational health and 
safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS 
Guidelines.
                                                   
13 Accredited professionals may include certified industrial hygienists, registered 
occupational hygienists, or certified safety professionals or their equivalent.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         11  
WORLD BANK GROUP
3.0 References  
BLS (US Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2004a. Industry Injury and Illness Data – 
2004. Supplemental News Release Tables. Table SNR05: Incident rate and 
number of nonfatal occupational injuries by industry, 2004. Washington, DC: 
BLS. Available at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb1479.pdf  
BLS (US Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2004b. Census of Fatal Occupational 
Injuries Charts, 1992–2004. Number and rate of fatal occupational injuries by 
private industry sector, 2004. (Table page 10). Washington, DC: BLS. Available 
at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0003.pdf  
DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs). Process 
Guidance Note 6/19 (05) Secretary of State’s Guidance for Fish-Meal and Fish-
Oil Processes. Scotland: DEFRA. 
EC (European Commission). 1996. Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 
1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (IPPC). EC. 
Available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/ippc/index.htm 
Consolidated: http://europa.eu.int/eur-
lex/en/consleg/pdf/1996/en_1996L0061_do_001.pdf  
EC (European Commission). 2005. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control, 
Draft Reference Document on Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink and 
Milk Industries. BREF finalized. Dated January 2006. p vii Typical FDM waste 
water quality after treatment – the emission levels given are indicators of the 
emission levels that would be achieved with those techniques normally 
considered to represent BAT. 
EC (European Commission). 2006. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control, 
Draft Reference Document on Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink and 
Milk Industries. BREF finalized. Dated January 2006. EC. Available at 
http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm  
FAO and WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health 
Organization).1962–2005. Codex Alimentaris is an important link of information 
on product origin tracking for food safety, input/output indicators for monitoring, 
including food/feed conversion efficiencies, etc. Maximum Residues Limits for 
Pesticides in Food. Geneva: FAO and WHO. Available at 
http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp   
 
HSC (Health and Safety Commission). 2005a. United Kingdom. Statistics of 
Fatal Injuries 2004/05. Fatal injuries to workers in manufacturing (p.7). London: 
National Statistics. Available at 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overall/fatl0405.pdf  
HSC (Health and Safety Commission). 2005b. United Kingdom. Rates of 
Reported Fatal Injury to Workers, Non Fatal Injuries to Employees and LFS 
Rates of Reportable Injury to Workers in Manufacturing. London: National 
Statistics. Available at http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/industry/manufacturing-
ld1.htm#notes  
India EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1998. Liquid Effluent Standards – 
Category: 52.0 Slaughter House, Meat & Sea Food industry. EPA Notification 
S.O. 64(E), dt. January 18, 1998. Indian EPA. Available at 
http://www.cpcb.nic.in/standard52.htm  
Irish EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1996. BATNEEC Guidance Note, 
Class 7.5, Fish-meal and Fish-oil (Draft 3). Ireland: Irish EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.ie/Licensing/IPPCLicensing/BATNEECGuidanceNotes/FileUploa
d,561,en.DOC  
ISO (International Standards Organization). 2005. ISO 20000: 2005: Food safety 
management systems: Requirements for any organization in the food chain. 
ISO. Available at 
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/CatalogueDetailPage.CatalogueDetail?CSNUMBER=3
5466&ICS1=67&ICS2=20&ICS3=  
Nordic Council of Ministers. 1997. BAT Best Available Technology in the Fishing 
Industry, TemaNord 1997:579, Copenhagen: Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Thailand MOSTE (Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment).1996. 
Industrial Effluent Standard. Notification by the Ministry of Science, Technology 
and Environment, No. 3, B.E.2539 (1996) issued under the Enhancement and 
Conservation of the National Environmental Quality Act B.E.2535 (1992). 
MOSTE. Available at 
http://www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water04.html#s1  
World Bank Group. International Finance Corporation Environmental, Health 
and Safety Guidelines for Fish Processing. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
Available at http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/EnvironmentalGuidelines
=== PAGE 12 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         12  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Annex A: General Description of Industry Activities 
The activities that charaterize the fish processing sector depend 
on the type of fish being processed and the desired final 
products. Fish processing broadly consists of removing the 
inedible part of the fish and preserving the edible parts.  The 
main fish processing stocks include cod, tuna, herring, 
mackerel, anchovy, pilchard, salmon, pollack, hake, and 
haddock. Products for human consumption range from whole 
fish to fillets and specialty products, which may be sold frozen, 
fresh (chilled) or preserved. Wild-caught marine fish processing 
facilities are typically located at commercial fishing harbors, 
while factories processing aquaculture products are often 
located close to the fish farming operation. Fish processing 
comprises the processing of the main product and associated 
by-products. Processing activities for fish filleting and 
preserving, the most common type of production type, are 
presented in Figure A-1 and described below. Mollusk and 
crustacean processing activities contain fewer stages and 
concentrate on the washing, cooking, cooling, processing, and 
packaging of the product.  
Industry Activities 
 Material Reception and Preparation 
Raw materials are typically received at the fish processing 
facility from a commercial fishing vessel or fish farm. For some 
fish species, gutting, cleaning, and head removal can take place 
at sea on board fishing vessels to maintain optimal quality. This 
is often the case for white fish with a low oil content, which are 
then kept on ice or frozen until they arrive at the processing 
facility. Fatty fish fillets may have an oil content of up to 30  
 
 
 
percent and are usually not gutted until they arrive at the 
processing facility. When fish are processed at sea, the offal is 
typically discarded into the sea. Although this reduces the 
amount of offal produced at land-based fish processing facilities, 
if taken ashore, the offal could be turned into a potentially 
valuable by-product. 
During unpacking, fish are subject to quality control (including 
traceability documentation) and, at this stage, any by-catch and 
offal can be diverted to the by-product line. Fresh raw fish is 
washed and graded to separate any material that does not meet 
standards for quality and uniformity. Frozen raw material has to 
be thawed (e.g. under running water or with air at controlled 
temperatures) before washing and grading. The prepared raw 
material is then chilled for storage, re-iced, or, in the case of live 
catch, held in holding tan 
Product Processing  
The product processing phase begins with skinning and cutting 
to remove the edible parts of the fish and reduce the size to the 
desired portions. Skinning can be done manually or 
automatically. In automatic operations, white fish are skinned by 
pulling the fillet over an automatic knife. Fatty fish, such as 
herring, are skinned by pulling them over a freezing drum. The 
fish are then transported to cutting tables where evisceration 
takes place (e.g. the heads, tails, and inedible parts are 
removed). The offal is collected and diverted to the by-product 
line. At this stage, any valuable by-products(e.g. liver and roe), 
are collected and then sent for separate handling. After 
evisceration, the cleaned fish products are filleted at the cutting 
tables and then washed. 
Evisceration generates significant amounts of solid waste, most 
of which ends up in the aqueous waste stream. Facilities 
processing fatty, ungutted fish such as herring typically generate
=== PAGE 13 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         13  
WORLD BANK GROUP
the highest levels of aqueous pollutants. However, dry collection 
and transport of waste can be used to reduce water 
consumption, increase the amount of saleable offal, and reduce 
organic discharge in wastewater (e.g. a 60 to 70 percent 
reduction can be achieved in the herring filleting industry).14 
Product Finalization 
In product finalization, the cut fish and shellfish product is 
preserved through a variety of processes and may be consumed 
in their primary form, either raw or cooked. They may also be 
further processed to produce fish- or shellfish-based foods, such 
as molded products (fish fingers) or prepared dishes. 
Preservation methods typically used in fish processing include 
chilling and freezing, canning, brining and salting, fermenting, 
drying, and smoking, which may be used in various 
combinations, such as fermentation with salting and drying. 
Chilling and freezing decrease the fish temperature to levels 
(approximately 0 °C or less than - 18°C, respectively) where 
metabolic activities, catalyzed by autolytic or microbial enzymes, 
are reduced or completely stopped. Canning preserves the 
product by first heating it (usually under pressure) to a 
temperature that destroys contaminating micro-organisms, and 
then sealing it in air-tight jars or cans. The remaining 
preservation techniques, described below, control microbial 
growth by reducing the water content, adding anti-microbial 
agents, and / or decreasing the pH of the product.  
During brining and salting, a product is treated with common 
and curing salts (nitrate and / or nitrite) to reduce the water 
activity  beyond the microbial tolerance limits, ensuring that the 
life of the product is increased and also giving it flavor. Both salt 
and nitrite are essential for curing to take place. Brining methods 
include dry, immersion, and tumble / massage brining. 
Fermentation processes allow the partial decomposition of the 
                                                   
14 Nordic Council of Ministers (1997). 
fish, which lowers the pH and prevents putrefaction, while giving 
the final product a strong, distinctive flavor.  
Drying decreases the water activity level of the fish to minimize 
microbial growth. Salted and fermented fish are often further 
dried to increase shelf life, or fish might be dried without other 
primary preservation steps. Drying processes can range from 
solar drying to temperature- and humidity-controlled drying 
rooms. Dried fish typically has a moisture content of between 38 
and 48 percent, depending on the product. Smoking preserves 
the product through exposure to smoke, which has a 
bacteriostatic effect. There are two types of smoking, hot and 
cold  both of which add flavor.  
By-products 
There are two main by-products from the main fish processing 
process: fish meal and fish oil.  
Fish Meal 
Fish meal is produced through a cooking and dehydrating 
process whereby fish oil is separated and water is removed from 
the product. Fish meal production is a high energy consuming 
process. Raw material enters the fish meal production line on a 
feeder system and is then cooked. Cooking temperature and 
duration depends on the cooker type, but typically the material is 
cooked for approximately 20 minutes at 90oC. This activity 
results in significant odor levels. The cooked material is pressed 
in a screw-press or decanter centrifuge, and the press liquid is 
diverted into a centrifuge where the fish oil is separated from the 
stick water. The stick-water flow is then evaporated in a 
multiple-stage evaporator and the remaining sludge is mixed 
with the press cake. This combined material is then dried until it 
has a water content of below 10 percent. After drying, the 
material is ground to break up any lumps. The fish meal is then 
sent to packaging and intermediate storage.
=== PAGE 14 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         14  
WORLD BANK GROUP
Fish Oil  
Fish oil production is typically an integrated part of fish meal 
production, however, the production of cod liver oil and other 
specialty products can be established as stand-alone production 
units. The quality of the fish oil obtained depends largely on the 
quality of the fish raw material and the equipment used. Today, 
the extraction of fish oil is conducted exclusively by centrifugal 
machinery, typically three-phase decanters and separators. 
 
Annex B: Sustainable Fishing Principles and References to Existing Good 
Practice Materials
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries 
Initiated by the United Nations Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), the Rome Declaration establishes a “Code 
of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.” The Code is available 
online at 
www.fao.org/figis/servlet/static?dom=org&xmlCCRF_prog.xml 
and outlines the following recommendations: 
• 
Base conservation and management decisions on the best 
scientific evidence available, taking into account traditional 
knowledge of the resources and their habitat;  
• 
Develop further selective and environmentally safe fishing 
gear to maintain biodiversity, minimize waste, catch of 
nontarget species, and so on;  
• 
Ensure fisheries interests are accommodated in the 
multiple uses of the coastal zone and are integrated into 
coastal area management;  
• 
Protect and rehabilitate critical fisheries habitats;  
• 
Ensure compliance with and enforcement of conservation 
and management measures and establish effective 
mechanisms to monitor and control activities of fishing 
vessels and fishing support vessels;  
• 
Exercise effective flag state control to ensure the proper 
application of the Code;  
• 
Cooperate through subregional, regional, and global 
fisheries management organizations;  
• 
Conduct fish trade in accordance with the principles, rights, 
and obligations established in the World Trade 
Organization Agreement; and 
• 
Promote awareness of responsible fisheries through 
education and training, as well as involve fishers and fish 
farmers in the policy formulation and implementation 
process.  
Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) 
The MSC provides a set of Principles and Criteria for 
Sustainable Fishing that are used as the standard in a third 
party, independent, and voluntary certification program. These 
principles are based on the Rome Declaration’s Code of 
Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.
=== PAGE 15 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
FISH PROCESSING 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
                                    
 
 
         15  
WORLD BANK GROUP
 
Figure A.1:  Fish Processing Activities 
Unpacking 
Thawing (in water) 
Washing and grading 
Skinning 
Evisceration and 
removal of valuable by 
products  
(liver, milt, etc) 
Raw material 
reception from fishing 
vessel or farm  
Rejected 
fish 
Rejected 
fish 
Skin 
Guts, head 
Filleting 
Washing 
Process
By-product 
Conservation: chilling, 
freezing, salting, 
drying 
Quality control 
External packing 
Bones, 
off-cuts, 
rejects 
By-product raw material
 
 
 
 
 
Fish meal and fish oil 
processes 
Dehydrating 
Packing
