=== PAGE 1 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
1 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for 
Dairy Processing
Introduction 
The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are 
technical reference documents with general and industry-
specific examples of Good International Industry Practice 
(GIIP)1. When one or more members of the World Bank Group 
are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as 
required by their respective policies and standards. These 
industry sector EHS guidelines are designed to be used 
together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which 
provides guidance to users on common EHS issues potentially 
applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of 
multiple industry-sector guidelines may be necessary. A 
complete list of industry-sector guidelines can be found at: 
www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/EnvironmentalGuidelines 
The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and 
measures that are generally considered to be achievable in new 
facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application 
of the EHS Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the 
establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate 
timetable for achieving them. The applicability of the EHS 
Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks 
established for each project on the basis of the results of an 
environmental assessment in which site-specific variables, such 
as host country context, assimilative capacity of the 
environment, and other project factors, are taken into account. 
                                                   
1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence and foresight 
that would be reasonably expected from skilled and experienced professionals 
engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar 
circumstances globally.  The circumstances that skilled and experienced 
professionals may find when evaluating the range of pollution prevention and 
control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, 
The applicability of specific technical recommendations should 
be based on the professional opinion of qualified and 
experienced persons. When host country regulations differ from 
the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines, 
projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If 
less stringent levels or measures than those provided in these 
EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project 
circumstances, a full and detailed justification for any proposed 
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental 
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the 
choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of 
human health and the environment.     
Applicability 
The EHS Guidelines for Dairy Processing facilities applies to the 
reception, storage, and industrial processing of raw milk and the 
handling and storage of processed milk and dairy products. 
Annex A contains a full description of industry activities for this 
sector. This document does not cover farming activities or 
collection of raw milk from farmers, which are covered in the 
EHS Guidelines for Mammalian Livestock Production. 
This document is organized according to the following sections: 
Section 1.0 — Industry-Specific Impacts and Management 
Section 2.0 — Performance Indicators and Monitoring  
Section 3.0 — References 
Annex     A — General Description of Industry Activities
                                                                                  
varying levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative 
capacity as well as varying levels of financial and technical feasibility.
=== PAGE 2 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
2 
WORLD BANK GROUP
1.0 
Industry-Specific Impacts 
and Management 
The following section provides a summary of EHS issues 
associated with dairy processing facilities that occur during the 
operational phase, along with recommendations for their 
management. Recommendations for the management of EHS 
issues common to most large industrial facilities during the 
construction and decommissioning phases are provided in the 
General EHS Guidelines.  
1.1 
Environment 
Environmental issues specifically associated with dairy 
processing facilities include the following: 
• 
Wastewater 
• 
Solid waste 
• 
Emissions to air 
• 
Energy consumption 
 
Wastewater  
Industrial Process Wastewater 
Due to the presence of milk solids (e.g. protein, fat, 
carbohydrates, and lactose), untreated wastewater from dairy 
processing facilities may have a significant organic content, 
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and chemical oxygen 
demand (COD). Whey may also contribute to high organic loads 
in wastewater. Salting activities during cheese production may 
result in high salinity levels in wastewater. Wastewater may also 
contain acids, alkali, and detergents with a number of active 
ingredients, and disinfectants, including chlorine compounds, 
hydrogen peroxide, and quaternary ammonia compounds. 
Wastewater may have a significant microbiological load and 
may also contain pathogenic viruses and bacteria. 
The following recommended techniques can be used to prevent 
the contamination of the wastewater stream: 
• 
Avoid milk, product, and by-product losses ( e.g. from 
spills, leaks, excessive changeovers, and shut downs) 
through the adoption of good manufacturing procedures 
and facility maintenance; 
• 
Separate and collect product waste, including rinse waters 
and by-products, to facilitate recycling or further processing 
for subsequent use, sale, or disposal (e.g. whey and 
casein); 
• 
Install grids to reduce or avoid the introduction of solid 
materials into the wastewater drainage system; 
• 
Process and foul drains should be separate in process 
areas and should discharge directly to a treatment plant 
and / or municipal sewerage system; 
• 
Pipes and tanks should be self–draining, with appropriate 
procedures for product discharge prior to, or integral with, 
cleaning procedures; 
• 
Subject to sanitary requirements, recycle process water, 
including condensate from evaporation processes, for 
preheating and heat-recovery systems for heating and 
cooling processes, to minimize water and energy 
consumption; 
• 
Adopt best-practice methods for facility cleaning, which 
may involve manual or automated Clean In Place (CIP)2 
systems, using approved chemicals and / or detergents 
with minimal environmental impact and compatibility with 
subsequent wastewater treatment processes. 
                                                   
2 Automated CIP systems reduce chemical, water, and energy consumption and 
facilitate rinse recovery but may not be appropriate for all applications.
=== PAGE 3 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
3 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Process Wastewater treatment 
Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this 
sector include grease traps, skimmers or oil water separators for 
separation of floatable solids; flow and load equalization; 
sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using clarifiers; 
biological treatment, typically anaerobic followed by aerobic 
treatment, for reduction of soluble organic matter (BOD); 
biological nutrient removal for reduction in nitrogen and 
phosphorus; chlorination of effluent when disinfection is 
required; dewatering and disposal of residuals; in some 
instances composting or land application of wastewater 
treatment residuals of acceptable quality may be possible. 
Additional engineering controls may be required to contain and 
neutralize nuisance odors. Source segregation and alternate 
treatment methods are typically used for high salinity streams 
that contribute to elevated TDS levels in the wastewater. 
Management of industrial wastewater and examples of 
treatment approaches are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. Through use of these technologies and good 
practice techniques for wastewater management, facilities 
should meet the Guideline Values for wastewater discharge as 
indicated in the relevant table of Section 2 of this industry sector 
document.  
Other Wastewater Streams & Water Consumption 
Guidance on the management of non-contaminated wastewater 
from utility operations, non-contaminated stormwater, and 
sanitary sewage is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system 
for industrial process wastewater. Dairy processing facilities use 
considerable quantities of potable water for processing and for 
cleaning of equipment, process areas, and vehicles. 
Recommendations to reduce water consumption, especially 
where it may be a limited natural resource, are provided in the 
General EHS Guidelines.  
Solid Waste 
Solid organic waste in dairy processing facilities mainly 
originates from production processes and includes non-
conforming products and product losses (e.g. milk spillages 
liquid whey and buttermilk), grid and filter residues, sludge from 
centrifugal separators and wastewater treatment, and packaging 
waste (e.g. discarded cuts, spent ripening bags, wax residues 
from cheese production) arising from incoming raw materials 
and production line damage. 
Recommended measures to reduce and manage solid waste 
include the following: 
• 
Where possible and subject to sanitary requirements, 
segregate solid process waste and non-conforming 
products for reprocessing into commercial products and by-
products (e.g. butter oil, processed cheese, animal feed, 
soap stock, or other technical-grade materials); 
• 
Optimize product filling and packaging equipment to avoid 
product- and packaging-material waste;  
• 
Optimize the design of packaging material to reduce the 
volume of waste (e.g. by using recycled materials and by 
reducing the thickness without compromising food safety 
criteria). If PET bottles are blown on site, plastic waste 
cuttings can be reused, or should be sorted as plastic 
waste for off-site recycling or disposal; 
• 
 Use uncontaminated sludge from on-site wastewater 
treatment for agricultural fertilizer or production of biogas. 
• 
Remaining waste should be managed and disposed of 
according to the recommendations for industrial waste in 
the General EHS Guidelines.
=== PAGE 4 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
4 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Air Emissions 
Exhaust Gases 
Exhaust gas emissions (carbon dioxide [CO2], nitrogen oxides 
[NOX] and carbon monoxide [CO]) in the dairy processing sector 
result from the combustion of gas and fuel oil or diesel in 
turbines, boilers, compressors and other engines for power and 
heat generation. Guidance for the management of small 
combustion source emissions with a capacity of up to 50 
megawatt thermal (MWth), including air emission standards for 
exhaust emissions, is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
For combustion source emissions with a capacity of greater than 
50 MWth refer to the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power.   
Dust 
Emissions of dust during dairy processing activities include fine 
milk powder residues in the exhaust air from the spray drying 
systems and bagging of product. Recommended measures to 
prevent and control dust emissions mainly consist of the 
installation of  exhaust ventilation equipped with dry powder 
retention systems (e.g. cyclones or bag filters). Bag filters are 
generally favored over wet scrubbing methods, as they use 
significantly less energy, generate less or no wastewater, and 
produce less noise. The presence of hot air and fine dust 
creates fire and explosion impacts. All modern spray dryers 
should be equipped with explosion release mechanisms and fire 
prevention systems. 
Odor  
The major sources of odor emissions in dairy processing 
facilities are related to on-site wastewater treatment facilities, in 
addition to fugitive odor emissions from filling / emptying milk 
tankers and storage silos. Recommended management 
techniques to prevent and control odor emissions include the 
following: 
• 
Ensure wastewater treatment facilities are properly 
designed and maintained for the anticipated wastewater 
load;  
• 
Keep all working and storage areas clean; 
• 
Empty and clean the fat trap frequently (e.g. daily emptying 
and weekly cleaning); 
• 
Minimize stock of waste and by-products and store for 
short periods in cold, closed, and well-ventilated rooms; 
• 
Enclose production activities that cause odor and operate 
under vacuum. 
Energy Consumption 
Dairy processing facilities consume considerable amounts of 
energy. Typically, approximately eighty percent of the energy 
requirements are for thermal uses to generate hot water and 
produce steam for process applications (e.g. pasteurization, 
evaporation, and milk drying) and cleaning purposes. The 
remaining 20 percent is used as electricity to drive processing 
machinery, refrigeration, ventilation, and lighting. In addition to 
recommendations to increase energy efficiency discussed in the 
General EHS Guidelines, the following industry-specific 
measures are recommended: 
• 
Reduce heat loss by : 
o 
Using continuous, instead of batch, pasteurizers 
o 
Partially homogenizing milk to reduce the size of heat 
exchangers 
o 
Using multistaged evaporators 
o 
Insulating steam, water, and air pipes / tubes 
o 
Eliminating steam leakage and using thermostatically 
controlled steam and water blending valves 
• 
Improve cooling efficiency by: 
o 
Insulating refrigerated room / areas 
o 
Installing automatic door closing (e.g. with 
microswitches) and applying airlocks and alarms;
=== PAGE 5 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
5 
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Employ heat recovery for both heating and cooling 
operations in milk pasteurizers and heat exchangers (e.g. 
regenerative countercurrent flow); 
• 
Investigate the means to recover waste heat, including: 
o 
Recovering waste heat from refrigeration plant, 
exhaust, and compressors (e.g. to preheat hot water) 
o 
Recovering evaporative energy 
o 
Employing heat recovery from air compressors and 
boilers (e.g. waste gas exchanger) 
1.2  
Occupational Health and Safety  
Occupational health and safety hazards for dairy processing 
facilities are similar to those of other industrial facilities and 
recommendations for the management of these issues can be 
found in the General EHS Guidelines. In addition, occupational 
health and safety issues that may be specifically associated with 
dairy processing operations include the following: 
• 
Physical hazards 
• 
Biological hazards 
• 
Chemical hazards 
• 
Exposure to heat, cold, and radiation 
Physical Hazards 
Physical hazards include exposure to same-level fall hazards 
due to slippery conditions, the use of machines and tools, and 
collisions with internal transport equipment (e.g. forklift trucks 
and containers). Guidance on general workplace conditions, 
including design and maintenance of working and walking 
surfaces to prevent slips and falls, is presented in the General 
EHS Guidelines. Additional, industry-specific recommendations 
are presented below.  
• 
Maintain walking and working surfaces clean and dry and 
provide workers with antislip footwear; 
• 
Provide workers with training in the proper use of 
equipment (including the proper use of machine safety 
devices) and personal protective equipment (PPE), such as 
hearing protection; 
• 
Ensure that the process layout reduces opportunities for 
process activities to cross paths, thus avoiding collisions 
and falls; 
• 
Demarcate transport corridors and working areas and 
ensure the proper placement of handrails on platforms, 
ladders, and stairs; 
• 
Ground all electrical equipment and installations in wet 
rooms. 
Lifting, Repetitive Work, and Work Posture Injuries 
Dairy processing activities may include a variety of situations in 
which workers can be exposed to lifting, carrying, repetitive 
work, and work-posture injuries. Such injuries may result from 
heavy manual lifting and repetitive work, including the operation 
of slicing and vacuum-packing machines and poor working 
postures caused by inadequate workstation and process activity 
design. Recommended management approaches, including the 
use of mechanical equipment where necessary (e.g. to move 
pallets of milk carton) to reduce these injuries are discussed in 
the General EHS Guidelines. 
Biological Hazards 
Exposure to biological and microbiological agents may be 
associated with inhalation and ingestion of dust and aerosols, 
particularly in milk powder operations. Dust from the ingredients 
used in dairy processing and high levels of humidity may cause 
skin irritation or other allergic reactions. 
In addition to the guidance included in the General EHS 
Guidelines, recommendations for the prevention and control of 
exposures to biological hazards specific to dairy processing 
include the following:
=== PAGE 6 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
6 
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Avoid dust- and aerosol-generating activities (e.g. use of 
compressed air or high-pressure water for cleaning) and, 
where they cannot be avoided, provide proper ventilation of 
enclosed or semi-enclosed areas to reduce or eliminate 
exposure to dust and aerosols;  
• 
Install exhaust ventilation equipped with filters and / or 
cyclones,  at sources of dust;  
• 
Provide workers with PPE that is appropriate for the 
process activity; 
• 
Ensure physical segregation of work and welfare facilities 
to maintain worker personal hygiene; 
• 
Avoid direct contact with non-conforming dairy products. 
  
Chemical Hazards 
Exposure to chemicals (including gases and vapors) typically 
involves chemical-handling activities related to cleaning 
operations and disinfection of process areas, in addition to the 
maintenance of heating (thermal oils) and cooling systems 
(ammonia). Recommended measures to prevent and control 
exposure to chemicals are discussed in the General EHS 
Guidelines. 
Heat and Cold 
Workers at dairy processing facilities may be exposed to heat 
from process activities and to cold in refrigeration areas and 
rooms. Recommendations for the management of exposure to 
heat and cold are presented in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Noise and Vibrations  
The main sources of noise in a dairy processing facility are 
centrifuges, homogenizers, spray towers, and filling and packing 
machinery which are all typically located in enclosed buildings. 
Recommendations for the management of exposure to noise 
and vibration are presented in the General EHS Guidelines. 
1.3 
Community Health and Safety  
Community health and safety impacts during the construction of 
dairy processing plants are common to those from the 
construction of other industrial facilities and are discussed in the 
General EHS Guidelines. During the facility’s planning phase, 
the location of the processing facility should be designated at an 
appropriate distance from neighbors, and access roads should 
be assessed for suitable use in food transport. Community 
health and safety impacts during the operation phase that are 
common to most industry sectors, including those related to 
traffic safety during transport of raw materials and finished 
product, are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Industry-specific issues with the potential to impact the 
community or the public at large are those associated with 
pathogens or microbial contaminants, as well as other chemical 
or physical impacts, associated with processed dairy products.  
Food Safety Impacts and Management 
A food product recall caused by contaminated or adulterated 
food products can damage a viable business. If a company can 
trace its products to specific lot numbers, then recall is a matter 
of removing all foods associated with those numbers. With a 
robust food safety program in place, a company can protect 
itself from product adulteration, contamination, and the impacts 
of food recalls.  
Dairy processing should be undertaken according to 
internationally recognized food safety standards consistent with 
the principles and practice of HACCP3 and Codex Alimentarius.4 
Recommended food safety principles include the following: 
• 
Respect “clean” and “dirty” zoning, designed in accordance 
with HACCP prerequisites (e.g. sanitary standard operating 
procedures), as discussed below; 
                                                   
3 ISO (2005). 
4 FAO and WHO (1962–2005).
=== PAGE 7 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
7 
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Ensure the cooling chain is unbroken for sensitive products 
requiring refrigeration; 
• 
As far as possible, ensure full traceability of all materials 
and products throughout the supply chain; 
• 
Ensure adequate veterinary inspection, including 
examination of vaccination certificates for the animals in 
the supply chain;  
• 
Comply with veterinary regulations and precautions for 
management of waste, sludge, and by-products; 
• 
Institutionalize all HACCP prerequisites, including 
o 
Sanitation 
o 
Good-management practices 
o 
Implementation of integrated pest and vector 
management programs and maximization of pest and 
vector control through mechanical means (e.g. traps 
and use mesh on doors and windows to reduce the 
need for chemical pest and vector control) 
o 
Chemical control 
o 
Allergen control 
o 
Customer complaints mechanism 
o 
Traceability and recall 
2.0 
Performance Indicators and 
Monitoring 
2.1  
Environment 
Effluent Guidelines 
Table 1 presents effluent guidelines for this sector. Guideline 
values for process emissions and effluents in this sector are 
indicative of good international industry practice as reflected in 
relevant standards of countries with recognized regulatory 
frameworks. Guideline values for process emissions and 
effluents in this sector are indicative of good international 
industry practice as reflected in relevant standards of countries 
with recognized regulatory frameworks. These guidelines are 
achievable under normal operating conditions in appropriately 
designed and operated facilities through the application of 
pollution prevention and control techniques discussed in the 
preceding sections of this document.   These levels should be 
achieved, without dilution, at least 95 percent of the time that the 
plant or unit is operating, to be calculated as a proportion of 
annual operating hours. Deviation from these levels in 
consideration of specific, local project conditions should be 
justified in the environmental assessment.  
Effluent guidelines are applicable for direct discharges of treated 
effluents to surface waters for general use. Site-specific 
discharge levels may be established based on the availability 
and conditions in use of publicly operated sewage collection and 
treatment systems or, if discharged directly to surface waters, 
on the receiving water use classification as described in the 
General EHS Guidelines.  
Emissions guidelines are applicable to process emissions. 
Combustion source emissions guidelines associated with 
steam- and power-generation activities from sources with a 
capacity equal to or lower than 50 MWth are addressed in the 
General EHS Guidelines with larger power source emissions 
addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power. 
Guidance on ambient considerations based on the total load of 
emissions is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.
=== PAGE 8 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
8 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Table 1. Effluent levels dairy processing 
Pollutants 
Units 
Guideline Value 
pH 
pH 
6 – 9 
BOD5 
mg/l 
50 
COD 
mg/l 
250  
Total nitrogen  
mg/l 
10  
Total phosphorus 
mg/l 
2 
Oil and grease 
mg/l 
10 
Total suspended solids 
mg/l 
50 
Temperature increase 
°C 
<3b 
Total coliform bacteria 
MPNa / 100 ml 
400 
Active Ingredients / 
Antibiotics 
To be determined on a case specific 
basis 
Notes:  
a MPN = Most Probable Number 
b At the edge of a scientifically established mixing zone which takes into 
account ambient water quality, receiving water use, potential receptors and 
assimilative capacity 
 
Resource Use and Waste Generation 
Tables 2 and 3 present information on resource use and waste 
generation in the dairy processing sector, which can be 
considered as indicators of this sector’s efficiency and may be 
used to track performance changes over time. Table 3 presents 
energy and resource consumption data for dairy processing 
facilities. The table shows that the variation is large, mainly 
because of differences in product variety and batch sizes. The 
quantity of wastewater is generally smaller compared with the 
consumption of freshwater. This is in part because some of the 
water used for cooling condensers evaporates and in part 
because some of the unpolluted, spent cooling water is not 
monitored during discharge into the surroundings.  
The variation in the energy consumption figures is the result of 
the differing proportions of energy-consuming products (e.g., 
powder) within the product range. Plants with powder production 
generally have higher energy consumption than in other plants. 
Within the group of market milk producers, the production of 
butter slightly increases energy consumption. 
Table 2. Waste generation in the dairy sector. 
Product range 
Total solid waste (kg/1000 l)  
Market milk and cultured 
products  
1.7–14a  
Cheese, whey, and 
powder  
0.5–10b 
Ice cream  
35–58c 
a Based on results from 13 dairies. 
b Based on results from 17 dairies. 
c Based on results from 4 dairies. 
Source: Nordic Council of Ministers (2001).
=== PAGE 9 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
9 
WORLD BANK GROUP
 
 
Table 3. Resource and energy consumption. 
Inputs per unit of 
product 
Mass load 
unit 
European 
dairiesa 
Swedish 
dairiesb 
Danish 
dairiesb 
Finnish 
dairiesb 
Norwegian 
dairiesb 
Industry 
benchmarkc 
Water 
Market milk and cultured 
products 
L/L processed 
milk 
 
0.96–2.8 
0.60–0.97 
1.2–2.9 
4.1 
1.0–1.5 
Cheese and whey 
L/L processed 
milk 
 
2.0–2.5 
1.2–1.7 
2.0–3.1 
2.5–3.8 
1.4–2.0 
Milk powder, cheese, 
and (or) liquid products 
L/L processed 
milk 
 
1.7–4.0 
0.69–1.9 
1.4–4.6 
4.6–6.3 
0.8–1.7 
Ice cream 
L/kg icecream 
 
 
 
 
 
4.0–5.0 
Energy 
Market milk and cultured 
products 
kWh/L 
processed milk 
0.09–1.11 
0.11–0.34 
0.07–0.09 
0.16–0.28 
0.45 
0.1–0.2 
Cheese and whey 
kWh/L 
processed milk 
0.06–2.08 
0.15–0.34 
0.12–0.18 
0.27–0.82 
0.21 
0.2–0.3 
Milk powder, cheese, 
and (or) liquid products 
kWh/L 
processed milk 
0.85–6.47 
0.18–0.65 
0.30–0.71 
0.28–0.92 
0.29–0.34 
0.3–0.4 
Ice cream 
KWh/kg ice 
cream 
 
0.75–1.6 
0.8–1.2 
Wastewater discharge 
Market milk and cultured 
products 
Liters/L 
processed milk 
 
0.8–2.5 
0.83–0.94 
1.2–2.4 
2.6 
0.9–1.4 
Cheese and whey 
Liters/L 
processed milk 
 
1.4–2.0 
0.77–1.4 
1.5–3.2 
3.2 
1.2–1.8 
Milk powder, cheese, 
and (or) liquid products 
liters/L 
processed milk 
 
1.2–4.3 
0.75–1.5 
1.9–3.9 
2.0–3.3 
0.8–1.5 
Ice cream 
L/kg ice cream 
 
2.7–4.4 
- 
5.6 
3.0–7.8 
2.7– 4.0 
a European Dairy Association (2002), cited in EC (2006). 
b Nordic Council of Ministers (2001). The numbers in brackets refer to the number of dairies in the sample. 
c Nordic Council of Ministers (2001).
=== PAGE 10 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
10 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Environmental Monitoring 
Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be 
implemented to address all activities that have been identified to 
have potentially significant impacts on the environment during 
normal operations and upset conditions. Environmental-
monitoring activities should be based on direct or indirect 
indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable 
to the particular project. 
Monitoring frequency should be sufficient to provide 
representative data for the parameter being monitored. 
Monitoring should be conducted by trained individuals following 
monitoring and record-keeping procedures and using properly 
calibrated and maintained equipment. Monitoring data should be 
analyzed and reviewed at regular intervals and compared with 
the operating standards so that any necessary corrective 
actions can be taken. Additional guidance on applicable 
sampling and analytical methods for emissions and effluents is 
provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
2.2  
Occupational Health and Safety 
Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines 
Occupational health and safety performance should be 
evaluated against internationally published exposure guidelines, 
of which examples include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) 
occupational exposure guidelines and Biological Exposure 
Indices (BEIs®) published by American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH),5  the Pocket Guide 
to Chemical Hazards published by the United States National 
Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH),6 
Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs) published by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration of  the United 
                                                   
5 Available at: http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/ 
6 Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/ 
States (OSHA),7 Indicative Occupational Exposure Limit Values 
published by European Union member states,8 or other similar 
sources. 
Accident and Fatality Rates 
Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among 
project workers (whether directly employed or subcontracted) to 
a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work 
time, different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Facility rates 
may be benchmarked against the performance of facilities in this 
sector in developed countries through consultation with 
published sources (e.g. US Bureau of Labor Statistics and UK 
Health and Safety Executive)9. 
Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring 
The working environment should be monitored for occupational 
hazards relevant to the specific project. Monitoring should be 
designed and implemented by accredited professionals10 as part 
of an occupational health and safety monitoring program. 
Facilities should also maintain a record of occupational 
accidents and diseases and dangerous occurrences and 
accidents. Additional guidance on occupational health and 
safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS 
Guidelines. 
                                                   
7 Available at: 
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDAR
DS&p_id=9992 
8 Available at: http://europe.osha.eu.int/good_practice/risks/ds/oel/ 
9 Available at: http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm 
10 Accredited professionals may include Certified Industrial Hygienists, 
Registered Occupational Hygienists, or Certified Safety Professionals or their 
equivalent.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
11 
WORLD BANK GROUP
3.0 
References and Additional Sources
Arbejdstilsynet. 2005. Anmeldte arbejdsbetingede lidelser 1999–2000.  
Årsopgørelse 2004. Reported Accumulated Occupational Disease 1999–2004. 
Annual Report 2004. Copenhagen: Arbejdstilsynet. Available at 
http://www.at.dk/graphics/at/07-Arbejdsmiljoe-i-tal/02-
Arbejdsskader/Aarsopgoerelser/Anmeldte-arbejdsbetingede-lidelser-2004.pdf 
BLS (US Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2004a. Industry Injury and Illness Data — 
2004. Supplemental News Release Tables. Table SNR05: Incident Rate and 
Number of Nonfatal Occupational Injuries by Industry, 2004. Washington, DC: 
BLS. Available at http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb1479.pdf 
BLS (US Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2004b. Census of Fatal Occupational 
Injuries Charts, 1992–2004. Number and Rate of Fatal Occupational Injuries by 
Private Industry Sector, 2004. Washington, DC: BLS. Available at 
http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0003.pdf  
EC (European Commission). 2006. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control. 
Reference Document on Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink and Milk 
Industries. Seville, Spain: EC. Available at 
http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm  
 EC (European Commission). 1996. Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 
September 1996 Concerning Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control 
(IPPC). Brussels: EC. Available at: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/ippc/index.htm Consolidated: 
http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/consleg/pdf/1996/en_1996L0061_do_001.pdf  
 FAO and WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health 
Organization).1962–2005. Codex Alimentarius. Geneva: FAO and WHO. 
Available at http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp 
HSC (Health and Safety Commission). 2005a. United Kingdom. Rates of 
Reported Fatal Injury to Workers, Non-Fatal Injuries to Employees and LFS 
Rates of Reportable Injury to Workers in Manufacturing. London: National 
Statistics. Available at http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/industry/manufacturing-
ld1.htm#notes  
HSC (Health and Safety Commission) 2005b. Health and Safety Statistics 
2004/05. London: National Statistics. Available on page 21 at 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overall/hssh0405.pdf  
HSC (Health and Safety Commission) 2005c. United Kingdom. Statistics of Fatal 
injuries 2004/05. Fatal Injuries to Workers in Manufacturing. London: National 
Statistics. Available at www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overall/fatl0405.pdf  
India EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1992. India EPA (Environmental 
Protection Agency). Notification 5 May 1992. 20.0 Dairy Industry: Effluent 
Standards. Delhi: India EPA. Available at http://www.cpcb.nic.in/standard20.htm 
International Dairy Federation. 2001. Bulletin of the International Dairy 
Federation. Nos. 327/1997, 382/2003, 365/2001. Available at http://www.fil-
idf.org 
Irish EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1996. BATNEEC Guidance Note. 
Class 7.2. Manufacture of Dairy Products. Draft 3. Dated 15 May 1996. Wexford: 
Irish EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.ie/Licensing/IPPCLicensing/BATNEECGuidanceNotes/  
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). 2005. ISO 22000: 2005: 
Food Safety Management Systems — Requirements for Any Organization in the 
Food Chain. Geneva: ISO. Available at 
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/CatalogueDetailPage.CatalogueDetail?CSNUMBER=3
5466&ICS1=67&ICS2=20&ICS3=  
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). 2004. ISO 14001: 2004: 
Environmental Management Systems — Requirements with guidance for use. 
Geneva: ISO. Available at 
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/CatalogueDetailPage.CatalogueDetail?CSNUMBER=3
5466&ICS1=67&ICS2=20&ICS3=  
Nordic Council of Ministers. 2001. Best Available Techniques (BAT) for the 
Nordic Dairy Industry. TemaNord 2001:586. ISBN 92-893-0706-4. Copenhagen: 
Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Thailand MOSTE (Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment). 1996. 
Industrial Effluent Standard. Notification No. 3, B.E.2539 (1996).  Bangkok: 
MOSTE. Available at 
http://www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water04.html#s1  
US EPA (Environment Protection Agency). 2006. Ag101. Available at 
http://www.epa.gov/oecaagct/ag101/printdairy.html  
Water Environment Federation. 2005. Standard Methods for the Examination of 
Water and Wastewater, 21st ed. American Public Health Association, American 
Water Works Association, and Water Environment Federation. Available at 
www.standardmethods.org  
World Bank Group. 1998. Pollution Prevention and Abatement Handbook. Dairy 
Industry. Effective July 1998. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Available at 
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/EnvironmentalGuidelines
=== PAGE 12 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
12 
WORLD BANK GROUP
Annex A: General Description of Industry Activities 
The dairy sector converts raw milk into safe products for human 
consumption. Products range from pasteurized and ultra high 
temperature processing (UHT) milk to value-added dairy 
products such as yoghurt, butter and cheese. In the past, liquid 
milk and fresh dairy product plants tended to be located in or 
near urban centers. The modern trend is for plants to be 
situated close to the raw milk supply, especially those producing 
long life products (e.g. UHT, cheese, and milk powders). The 
current trend toward large processing plants has provided 
companies with more automated and efficient equipment. This 
development tends to increase the environmental impact in 
some areas, mainly due to high concentration of waste and 
increased traffic. Dairy processing plants can be divided into two 
categories: 
• 
Fluid milk processing involving the pasteurization and 
processing of raw milk into liquid milk for direct consumption, 
as well as cream, flavored milk, and fermented products such 
as buttermilk and yogurt. 
• 
Industrial milk processing involving the pasteurization and 
processing of raw milk into value-added dairy products such 
as cheese and casein, butter and other milk fats, milk powder 
and condensed milk, whey powder and other dairy 
ingredients, and ice cream and other frozen dairy products.  
Dairy processing is continuously improving. New filtration and 
drying processes have increased recovery of milk solids that were 
previously discharged. Processes have become significantly more 
energy efficient and the use of electronic monitoring, control, and 
regulation systems has improved processing effectiveness and 
reduced product loss considerably.  
Figure A-1 presents a simplified schematic diagram of the 
processes in a notional dairy, each of which is further described 
below.  
Raw Milk Collection, Reception and Storage 
The first steps in preserving the quality of milk should be taken at 
the farm. To achieve the best quality raw milk at intake, milking 
conditions must be as hygienic as possible. The milk must be 
chilled to below + 4oC immediately after milking and be kept at this 
temperature during transport to the dairy. 
Best practice indicates that farms or intermediate collection centers 
be equipped with stainless steel refrigerated bulk storage tanks. 
Raw milk is collected and transported to the processing plant in 
stainless steel insulated or refrigerated bulk tank cars of up to 
30,000 liters. Markets with a predominance of small farmers may 
still use aluminum or stainless steel cans of 30-50 liters which are 
collected by, or delivered to, the processing plant.  
Where water and electricity is not available the milk should be 
delivered to a central collecting point with cooling facilities or 
delivered to the dairy for processing immediately after milking. Bulk 
tanks or cans should be cleaned and sanitized immediately after 
discharge at the dairy. Water is used to rinse and clean the 
reception lines, road tankers, and cans. Modern plants may employ 
Clean in Place systems (CIP) and automated can washers.  
At the reception point, the raw milk is sampled for quality analysis 
and, after acceptance, measured by volume or by weight and 
cooled to a temperature below +4ºC. After cooling, the milk is 
stored in a silo to await processing. Ice water is normally used for 
cooling.  
Separation and Standardization  
Centrifugal separation and clarification is common in dairy 
processing to ensure further processing of standard products 
avoiding quality variations. In most dairies, the cream separation 
and clarification is carried out using self-cleaning separators. The 
separator also discharges sediment consisting of dirt particles,
=== PAGE 13 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
13 
WORLD BANK GROUP
udder cells, and bacteria, and leucocytes, which normally is 
collected or led to the wastewater drain. 
Standardization of the dry matter for fat, protein, and lactose 
content of the milk usually takes place in the production phase 
of most dairy products. The most common techniques include 
mixing of skimmed milk and cream, evaporation, and membrane 
filtration.  
Homogenization  
The aim of homogenization is to prevent gravity separation of the 
fat in the product and to improve the syneresis stability of mainly 
cultured products. The homogenizer consists of a high-pressure 
pump and homogenizing valve driven by a powerful electric motor. 
Heat Treatment and Cooling of Milk Products 
Regardless of what the end product will be, the milk is usually heat 
treated to ensure that all pathogenic11 microorganisms are 
removed. This is achieved by pasteurization or sterilization, a 
heating procedure that is required by law in most countries with the 
exception of some types of cheese made from unpasteurized 
milk12. To save energy, the pasteurization process should involve 
regenerative heat exchange, which means that the already 
pasteurized milk is used as a heating medium for the incoming cold 
milk. After heating, the milk is cooled down to a temperature 
suitable for subsequent processing or storage. 
Milk and Dairy Product Production 
Cheese Production 
Cheese is obtained by coagulation of milk and consists mainly of 
the protein and fat fractions of the milk. Cheese production involves 
several steps common to most types of cheese and includes 
coagulation and separation of curd, pressing, salting, ripening, and 
packaging. Depending on the type of cheese produced, 85–90 
                                                   
11 A pathogenic organism is one which causes disease, sickness or toxicity. 
12 Not permitted in all jurisdictions 
percent of the original milk volume is separated as a residual liquid 
by-product called whey which contains the lactose fraction of the 
milk and some proteins. Whey can be further processed by 
concentration and drying to produce powders, whey protein 
concentrates, lactose and animal feeds. It may also be sold directly 
as animal feed. Membrane filtration can be used in cheese 
production as an effective means of limiting the loss of milk solids, 
but membrane cleaning requires large quantities of water, heat, 
and cleaning agents. 
Butter Production 
Butter can be produced as batches in churns or continuously in a 
continuous butter-making machine. Although churns are still used 
today,  most of them have been replaced by continuous machines. 
The churning step produces buttermilk, which represents a 
potential waste stream unless collected for sale. Emptying and 
cleaning of butter-making equipment and packaging machines 
generate waste and wastewater containing fat.   
Condensed Milk, Milk Powder, and Dairy Ingredients 
For these products, evaporation or membrane filtration issued to 
pre-concentrate skimmed milk, whole milk, buttermilk, and whey 
before final processing. The final drying is usually achieved by 
spray drying, in which an atomizer disperses the pre-concentrated 
milk as a fog-like mist into a large chamber through which hot air is 
drawn in a spiral pattern. The water in the milk spray evaporates 
instantly to form powder particles. Alternatively, the older drum 
drying process may be used, in which the water evaporates on 
rotating, steam-heated drums. 
Ice Cream 
Ice cream manufacture involves the handling of both dry and liquid 
raw materials including reception of milk, cream, sugar and other
=== PAGE 14 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
14 
WORLD BANK GROUP
ingredients; mixing operations; pasteurizing, freezing and 
hardening; packaging; and storage at temperatures below -180C.  
Packaging of Milk and Dairy Products  
Packaging protects the product from bacteriological, light, and 
oxygen contamination. Liquid milk products may be packed in a 
beverage carton, which is mainly paperboard covered by a thin 
layer of food-grade polyethylene on either side. Milk cartons for 
long-life milk have an additional layer of aluminum foil. Many 
other packaging materials are also used, ranging from simple 
plastic pouches to glass bottles, PET laminates and PVC 
bottles. PET laminates are becoming increasingly popular and 
are blown at the plant from granulates, generating small 
amounts of plastic waste when the neck of the container is cut 
off. Cultured products are packed in beverage cartons or plastic 
cups and bottles with lids of aluminum foil or paper. In some 
cases the containers are wrapped together in a carton as 
multipacks.
=== PAGE 15 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
DAIRY PROCESSING 
 
                             
 
APRIL 30, 2007 
15 
WORLD BANK GROUP
 
Figure A-1. Dairy Processing Activities 
Pasteurization  
Separation and 
standardization 
Milk receipt and 
storage 
Whole and 
skimmed milk 
products 
Cold storage 
Packaging and distribution 
Butter production 
Milk powder 
Cheese 
production 
Source: Adapted from English Dairy Board (2004)
Raw milk and 
minor ingredients 
 
 
 
Water 
 
 
 
 
Energy (electricity, 
steam) 
 
 
 
 
Detergents and 
sanitizers 
 
 
 
Refrigerants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Packaging 
materials 
Dairy products
 
 
 
Effluent from - 
Tanker washing 
Cleaning 
Milk spills 
Cheese whey 
 
 
 
 
Air emissions –  
Combustion gases 
Milk powder dust 
Refrigerant gases 
Odor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Solid waste – 
Damaged 
products 
Out-of-date 
products 
OUTPUTS
INPUTS
