=== PAGE 1 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
1                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for 
Meat Processing 
Introduction 
The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are 
technical reference documents with general and industry-
specific examples of Good International Industry Practice 
(GIIP)1. When one or more members of the World Bank Group 
are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as 
required by their respective policies and standards. These 
industry sector EHS guidelines are designed to be used 
together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which 
provides guidance to users on common EHS issues potentially 
applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of 
multiple industry-sector guidelines may be necessary. A 
complete list of industry-sector guidelines can be found at: 
www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/EnvironmentalGuidelines 
The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and 
measures that are generally considered to be achievable in new 
facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application 
of the EHS Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the 
establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate 
timetable for achieving them. The applicability of the EHS 
Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks 
established for each project on the basis of the results of an 
environmental assessment in which site-specific variables, such 
as host country context, assimilative capacity of the 
environment, and other project factors, are taken into account. 
                                                   
1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence and foresight 
that would be reasonably expected from skilled and experienced professionals 
engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar 
circumstances globally.  The circumstances that skilled and experienced 
professionals may find when evaluating the range of pollution prevention and 
control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, 
varying levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative 
capacity as well as varying levels of financial and technical feasibility. 
The applicability of specific technical recommendations should 
be based on the professional opinion of qualified and 
experienced persons. When host country regulations differ from 
the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines, 
projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If 
less stringent levels or measures than those provided in these 
EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project 
circumstances, a full and detailed justification for any proposed 
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental 
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the 
choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of 
human health and the environment.  
 Applicability 
The EHS Guidelines for Meat Processing include information 
relevant to meat processing, focusing on bovine and porcine 
slaughtering and processing from reception of the animals until 
the carcasses are ready for sale or further processing. This 
document pertains to facilities that provide simple processing of 
the by-products of meat slaughtering.2 For guidance on animal 
welfare, see the IFC Good Practice Note “Animal Welfare in 
Livestock Operations.”3 This document is organized according to 
the following sections: 
Section 1.0 — Industry-Specific Impacts and Management 
Section 2.0 — Performance Indicators and Monitoring  
Section 3.0 — References 
Annex     A — General Description of Industry Activities  
                                                   
2 Livestock rearing is covered in the EHS Guidelines for Mammalian Livestock 
Production. Poultry is addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Poultry Production 
and Poultry Processing. 
3 Available at: http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/enviro.nsf/Content/Publications_GoodPractice. 
An additional source for animal welfare guidance is the Farm Animal Welfare Council 
available at www.fawc.org.uk
=== PAGE 2 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
2                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
1.0 
Industry-Specific Impacts 
and Management 
The following section provides a summary of EHS issues 
associated with meat processing operations, along with 
recommendations for their prevention and abatement. 
Recommendations for the management of EHS issues common 
to most large industrial facilities during the construction and 
decommissioning phases are provided in the General EHS 
Guidelines.  
1.1 Environment  
Environmental issues specific to meat processing may include 
the following: 
• 
Solid waste and by-products 
• 
Wastewater 
• 
Emissions to air  
• 
Resource consumption 
 
Solid Waste and by-products 
The meat-processing industry slaughters animals to produce 
primary carcass products, processed cuts, and a variety of by-
products. The rendering industry processes the parts not used 
for human consumption for technical use and for use as animal 
feed. This activity may generate large quantities of solid waste 
including the manure and bedding material generated during 
animal transport and lairage activities, as well as waste from 
processing steps. Waste products and by-products of 
slaughtering processes can generally be divided into the 
following categories: (1) manure, contents of the rumen and 
intestines; (2) edible products such as blood and liver; (3) 
inedible products such as hair, bones, feathers; (4) fat 
(recovered from the wastewater by means of fat-separators); 
and (5) non-recoverable waste materials that require final 
disposal. The quantity of by-products from cattle often exceeds 
50 percent of the animal’s live weight, and 10 to 20 percent for 
pigs.4   
Special Risk Materials (SRM) 
Special risk materials (SRM)5 are tissues in cattle that contain 
the agent that may transmit bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
(BSE), transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE), or 
scrapie disease if reprocessed into animal feed. The human 
disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD), may result from 
human consumption of products from animals infected with 
BSE. Although not typically used for food, processing activities 
may accidentally result in the mixing of SRM tissue with meat 
products produced for human consumption. Therefore, SRM 
should be carefully separated from carcasses before their 
processing into commercially valuable by-products, whether for 
human or animal consumption. 
Separated SRM should be destroyed through incineration with a 
minimum gas temperature of 850 °C. Prior to incineration, the 
material should be reduced to an appropriate particle size and 
heat-treated according to defined combinations of time, 
temperature and pressure.6 Incineration should be conducted in 
specialized facilities whether on or off site, in accordance with 
government regulations and relevant permits. Additional 
information on waste incineration is presented in the EHS 
Guidelines for Waste Management Facilities.   
                                                   
4 Livestock, Environment and Development Initiative (1996) 
5 SRM is defined as the skull, brain, nerves attached to the brain, eyes, tonsils, 
spinal cord and nerves attached to the spinal cord of cattle aged 30 months or 
older, and the distal ileum (portion of the small intestine) of cattle of all ages.  
(Health Canada, 2004). SRM according to Regulation No.1774/2002 of the 
European Parliament:  i) Cattle more than 12 months of age: the skull including 
the brain and eyes; the tonsils; the spinal cord; and the vertebral column except 
the vertebrae of the tail and the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae, 
but including dorsal root ganglia. Ii)  Cattle of all ages: the intestines from the 
duodenum to the rectum. 
6 Additional details on pretreatment specifications are provided in Regulation 
No. 1774/2002 of the European Parliament.  European Community (2002).
=== PAGE 3 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
3                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
Sick and Diseased Animals 
Animals that die during transport, and sick or dead animals from 
quarantine pens, should be separated and transported to 
external facilities in separate containers for treatment and final 
disposal.7 Depending on the risk classification of the animal, 
including whether disease such as BSE is suspected, typical 
disposal procedures for sick or dead animals include the 
following: 
• 
Collecting animals not approved by veterinary inspection 
and segregating them from animal materials sent by the 
slaughterhouse for off-site rendering.8 This segregation is 
necessary because the treatment processes in off-site 
rendering plants can entail higher pressure, temperature, 
and duration, in accordance with the risk classifications of 
the waste materials9; 
• 
Storing carcasses until collection to prevent putrefaction, 
odors, and attraction of vectors, using cooling if necessary. 
Storage times should be minimized to avoid energy 
intensive cooling requirements; 
• 
Transformation in a bio-gas or composting plant after 
pressure sterilization; 
• 
Using a reliable collection company approved by local 
authorities that disposes of carcasses by rendering, with 
adequate time, temperature and pressure criteria for 
sanitization, or incineration / co-incineration depending on 
the cause of fatality;  
• 
Where no authorized collection of carcasses is available, 
and after approval of the local veterinary authorities, 
incinerating or burying carcasses on site if allowed. 
Whether on site or off site, the burial area should be 
accessible to earth-moving machinery and have stable, 
low-permeability soils with sufficient physical separation 
                                                   
7 European Community (2002). 
8 European Commission (2005). 
9 See footnote 3. 
from houses and water resources to avoid contamination 
by vapors or leachate from buried, decaying materials.   
Reprocessable Solid Animal Waste 
Reprocessing of solid animal waste into commercial by-products 
should consider the following: 
• 
Specific control measures should be taken to segregate 
and manage high-risk tissues according to the 
recommended SRM management practices discussed 
above; 
• 
Avoid processing of waste materials for same species 
feeding;  
• 
Use bones, trim, scraps, hooves, horns and other detritus 
(not otherwise used beneficially for the production of stable 
meals, for example, bone meal) in-house or sell to third 
parties; 
• 
Clean stomach for use as food, feed, or pet food; 
• 
Clean intestines for use as food or sausage casings;  
• 
Recover fat from cut-offs, intestines, and hides for use as 
animal feed, if collected in relatively pure form. Tallow can 
alternatively be used as a bio-fuel or for soap among other 
uses; 
• 
Remove mucosa from small pig casings (the mucous 
membrane of the small intestine) rather than disposing in 
the wastewater stream. Environmental breakdown of 
mucosa has a high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) 
and has applications in the pharmaceutical industry for 
manufacturing heparin.  Alternatively, mucosa may be 
digested anaerobically to produce bio-gas;10 
• 
Enhance the quality and value of bovine hides for sale to 
tanneries. Methods include prevention of livestock bruising 
during transport and handling, maintenance of lairage 
areas to keep animals clean, use of rounded knives when 
                                                   
10 European Commission (2005).
=== PAGE 4 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
4                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
hides are manually removed, and washing / preservation of 
hides and / or use of refrigeration or proper drying or 
salting to reduce bacterial degradation during transport to 
the tannery; 
• 
Curtail animal feeding 12 hours before slaughtering to 
reduce manure production and reduce the risk of 
contamination of the carcasses with manure and digestive 
tract content during slaughter;  
• 
Provide sufficient manure storage capacity until the manure 
is transported for agricultural and other uses11; 
• 
Collect and compost stomach and intestinal contents and 
manure (preferably removed in “dry” form without mixing 
into the effluent, and provided it does not come from 
diseased animals) for use as compost or other agricultural 
application. In the case of bovine slaughter, the cattle’s first 
stomach has a considerable organic material content 
(approximately 10, 40, and 50 kg for veal calves less than 
one-year-old, bulls, and cows, respectively).12  
Sludge from Wastewater Treatment 
The following measures should be considered to further reduce 
the volume of waste generated from wastewater treatment 
processes:  
• 
Segregate wastewater containing manure and digestive 
tract content (e.g. from reception of live animals, lairage, 
cleaning of trucks and specific areas in the casing 
department). Screened materials from these areas can be 
used as fertilizers on agricultural land; 
• 
Reuse materials that may be separated from pretreatment 
processes (e.g. screened materials, suspended solids, and 
emulsified fats from flotation) in the manufacture of high-
                                                   
11 Further information regarding manure storage is available from the Livestock 
and Poultry Environmental Stewardship Curriculum, at 
http://www.lpes.org/Lessons/Lesson21/21_2_sizing_storage.pdf 
12 Sorlini in European Commission (2005). 
quality by-products (e.g. pet food or technical fat for 
oleochemicals manufacturing);  
• 
Increase the quality of the sludge for possible use as 
agricultural fertilizer by reducing or eliminating pathogens 
such as E. coli 0157, campylobacter, and salmonella 
through controlled aerobic treatment (compost) or 
anaerobic digestion (bio-gas);  
• 
Treat materials with high organic content (e.g. blood, fat, 
and manure) anaerobically for the purpose of generating 
and using bio-gas as an energy source; 
• 
If no other alternatives are feasible, dispose of fat at 
landfills.  
Wastewater 
Industrial Process Wastewater 
Meat processing wastewater typically has a high content of 
organic material and consequently a high biochemical oxygen 
demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) due to the 
presence of blood, tallow, and mucosa. Wastewater may have a 
high content of nitrogen (from blood) and phosphorus, in 
addition to pathogenic and non-pathogenic viruses and bacteria, 
and parasite eggs. Detergents and disinfectants, including acid, 
alkaline, and neutral compounds, disinfectants, and liquid 
paraffin, may enter the wastewater stream after application 
during facility-cleaning activities.  
Recommended management techniques for pollution prevention 
of wastewater include: 
• 
Prioritize the removal of solid waste before it enters the 
wastewater stream:  
o 
Use floor drains and collection channels with grids, 
screens, and / or traps to reduce the amount of solids 
entering the wastewater stream
=== PAGE 5 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
5                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
o 
Collect blood for use in food, feed or in the 
pharmaceutical industry.13  
o 
Manure from the stockyard and from vehicle cleaning 
should be removed while in solid form; 
o 
Stomach and intestine contents should be removed 
and transported in a dry state by pumps, screw 
conveyers or trolleys to outdoor storage and collection 
points for further recycling. Offal should be transported 
by vacuum or compressed air systems; 
o 
Prevent direct runoff to water courses, especially from 
lairage and manure storage areas; 
• 
Apply appropriate tank and equipment cleaning 
procedures. Clean in Place (CIP) cleaning procedures are 
useful to reduce chemical, water and energy consumption 
in cleaning operations; 
• 
Choose cleaning agents that do not have adverse impacts 
on the environment in general, on wastewater treatment 
unit processes, or on sludge quality for agricultural 
application. Prevent the use of agents that contain active 
chlorine or prohibited, banned or restricted chemicals. 
Optimize agent use through correct dosage and application 
(e.g. CIP); 
• 
Implement integrated pest and vector management 
programs and maximize vector control through mechanical 
means (e.g. traps, and use of mesh on doors and windows) 
to avoid or minimize the introduction of chemicals 
potentially harmful to the wastewater treatment process or 
the sludge quality.  
                                                   
13 Blood collection is the single most efficient clean technology measure for 
wastewater, because liquid blood has a high nitrogen content (30 g/l), COD (400 
g/l), and BOD (200 g/l). Blood from slaughtered animals may be collected over a 
trough. The trough should prevent water from entering the blood tank during 
cleaning. Sufficient time should be allowed for dripping and drip collection. If the 
blood is to be used in products for human consumption, a hollow knife with 
suction can be applied to obtain high-quality blood. This method, however, gives 
a lower recovery yield and increases the blood volume entering the wastewater 
stream. 
Process Wastewater Treatment 
Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this 
sector include grease traps, skimmers or oil water separators for 
separation of floatable solids; sedimentation for suspended 
solids reduction using clarifiers; biological treatment, typically 
anaerobic followed by aerobic treatment, for reduction of soluble 
organic matter (BOD); biological nutrient removal for reduction 
in nitrogen and phosphorus; chlorination of effluent when 
disinfection is required; dewatering and disposal of residuals; in 
some instances composting or land application of wastewater 
treatment residuals of acceptable quality may be possible. 
Additional engineering controls may be required to (i) remove 
parasitic eggs or spores from influent that may pass through 
treatment system untreated, and (ii) contain and neutralize 
nuisance odors. Management of industrial wastewater and 
examples of treatment approaches are discussed in the 
General EHS Guidelines. Through use of these technologies 
and good practice techniques for wastewater management, 
facilities should meet the Guideline Values for wastewater 
discharge as indicated in the relevant table of Section 2 of this 
industry sector document.  
Other Wastewater Streams & Water Consumption 
Guidance on the management of non-contaminated wastewater 
from utility operations, non-contaminated stormwater, and 
sanitary sewage is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system 
for industrial process wastewater. Elevated consumption of 
high-quality water, which is an important element of food safety, 
is often characteristic of the meat processing industry. Water is 
used for watering and washing livestock, cleaning vehicles, de-
hairing and rind treatment of pigs, rinsing carcasses and by-
products, and cleaning and disinfecting equipment and process 
areas. Recommendations to reduce water consumption,
=== PAGE 6 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
6                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
especially where it may be a limited natural resource, are 
provided in the General EHS Guidelines.  
Emissions to Air 
Odor may often be the most significant form of air pollution in 
meat processing. Major process odor sources include singeing, 
scalding, lairage, wastewater treatment and rendering. The 
latter is an evaporative process that produces condensate with a 
foul odor. Particulate emissions are typically not significant, 
although they may be emitted during singeing and meat-
smoking processes. Livestock handling areas also may be a 
source of organic dust depending on the management of fugitive 
dust.  
Odor Prevention 
• 
Consider the location of new facilities, taking into account 
proper distances to neighbors and the propagation of 
odors; 
• 
Pasteurize organic material before processing it to halt 
biological processes that generate odor; 
• 
Install rendering equipment in closed spaces and operate 
under negative pressure compared to ambient air 
conditions; 
• 
Minimize the inventory of raw carcasses, waste and by-
products and store it for short periods of time in a cold, 
closed, well-ventilated place;  
• 
Seal off animal by-products (e.g. in covered leak-proof 
containers or vehicles) during transport, loading  unloading, 
and storage activities. Transport blood in insulated 
containers to reduce temperature increase; 
• 
Clean pens and livestock yards on a timely basis; 
• 
Empty and clean fat traps frequently;  
• 
Add oxidants such as nitrates to stored waste and effluent, 
(e.g. in  settling ponds). The nitrates are added in powder 
or granulate form and the resulting chemical reaction 
reduces odor levels; 
• 
Unload containers containing animal by-products within an 
enclosed building that is equipped with extraction 
ventilation connected to odor abatement devices. 
Odor Control  
Odor abatement may include one or more of the following 
techniques depending on the location of the facility and 
proximity of other industrial, commercial or residential areas: 
• 
Post-combustion of flue gases from the singeing and meat-
smoking processes; 
• 
Use of exhaust stack heights from rendering and smoking 
processes that are consistent with practices as described 
in the General EHS Guidelines; 
• 
Use of wet scrubbers to remove odors with a high affinity to 
water, such as ammonia emitted during the rendering 
process; 
• 
Condensation of vapors from rendering process combined 
with scrubbers 
• 
Convey non-condensable gases to the boiler, and pass the 
low intensity / high volume odors through a biofilter; 
• 
Burn whole vapor gases in a thermal oxidizer and pass the 
low  intensity / high volume odours trough a biofilter 
 
Dust / Particulates 
Dust and particulates are mainly associated with livestock 
handling and singeing activities. The recommended prevention 
and control techniques include the following: 
• 
Clean and maintain a sufficient level of humidity in pens 
and livestock yards;  
• 
Reduce fugitive dust by minimizing surface areas with 
exposed soil surfaces, and by planting hedges or erecting 
fences to minimize wind turbulence;
=== PAGE 7 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
7                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Use liquefied petroleum gas or natural gas instead of fuel 
oil in the singeing process. 
Energy Consumption 
Meat processing facilities use energy to heat water and produce 
steam for process applications and for cleaning purposes, as 
well as for operation of miscellaneous electrical equipment, 
refrigeration, and air compressors. In addition to the energy 
efficiency recommendations presented in the General EHS 
Guidelines, recommended improvements in the meat 
processing sector may include: 
• 
Generating bio-gas in anaerobic wastewater digestion and 
utilizing this fuel for boilers or for electric power generation; 
• 
Covering and insulating scalding tanks, controlling water 
levels, re-circulating water, using steam instead of scalding 
for pig processing, and using insulated sterilizers to 
sterilize knives; 
• 
Improving cooling efficiency by insulating refrigeration room 
/ areas and doors, installing an automatic door-closing 
mechanism (e.g. micro switches), applying airlocks, and 
setting alarms to go off when chill room doors and external 
loading doors are left open; 
• 
Recovering evaporative energy in the rendering process 
through the use of multi-effect evaporators14; 
• 
Using automated systems that ensure that the singeing 
flame is on only when an animal carcass is present. 
 
1.2 
Occupational Health and Safety  
Occupational health and safety hazards for meat processing are 
similar to those of other industrial facilities. Recommendations 
for the management of these issues can be found in the 
General EHS Guidelines. In addition, occupational health and 
                                                   
14 UNEP (2000). 
safety issues that may be specifically associated with meat 
processing operations include the following: 
• 
Physical hazards 
• 
Biological hazards 
• 
Chemical hazards 
• 
Exposure to heat, cold and radiation 
• 
Exposure to sources of noise 
Physical Hazards15 
Physical hazards include exposure to same-level fall hazards 
due to slippery conditions, the use of machines and tools, 
principally for cutting purposes, and the potential for strains from 
the handling of live animals and carcasses.16  Guidance on 
general workplace conditions, including design and 
maintenance of working and walking surfaces to prevent slips 
and falls, are presented in the General EHS Guidelines.  
Additional industry-specific recommendations are presented 
below.  
Machine / Tool Safety 
Equipment safety issues are mainly associated with the use of 
knives, mechanical saws, packaging equipment, and mincers.  
Cuts may be caused by sharp bones and edges on process 
equipment (e.g. stainless steel basins). Recommendations for 
accident prevention from equipment use include: 
• 
Providing workers with training in the proper use of cutting 
equipment (including the proper use of machine safety 
devices) and personal protective equipment (PPE) such as 
metallic gloves and leather aprons for cutting activities; 
                                                   
15 Further detailed information regarding physical hazards of meat processing, 
and recommended prevention and control guidance, is available from SafeWork 
SA, Government of South Australia, at: 
http://www.safework.sa.gov.au/contentPages/Industry/MeatProcessing/default.ht
m 
16 These injuries account for 80 percent of reported occupational illnesses in 
Danish pig and cattle slaughterhouses measured over a five-year period from 
1999–2004. Arbejdstilsynet (2005).
=== PAGE 8 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
8                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Ensuring that ritual slaughter is carried out by individuals 
who have received the correct training and have 
subsequently been approved to slaughter animals; 
• 
Designing a proper slaughterhouse floor that is slip-proof 
when wet. 
Lifting, Carrying, Repetitive Work, and Work Postures 
Meat processing activities may include a variety of situations in 
which workers can be exposed to lifting, carrying, and repetitive 
work and work posture injuries. Such situations include manual 
handling of live animals in the stables, removal and handling of 
manure and other solid wastes, handling of carcasses including 
pushing, pulling, hanging up, and taking down from the sliding 
rails, and manually lifting boxes with meat or bones. Additional 
situations of repetitive work may include the boning process, 
operation of machinery like slicing machines or vacuum packing 
machines, packing work, and cleaning of intestines. 
Recommendations for the management of these hazards 
include: 
• 
Training workers in proper live animal handling methods 
including the use of structures and equipment for handling 
and restraining animals;  
• 
Designing appropriate pen / lairage / livestock yards such 
that the animals can be calmly moved into the facility, and 
which allows for escape routes for the workers;  
• 
Conducting stunning of cattle in a controlled setting (e.g.  
stun-box).  
Biological Hazards 
Exposure to biological and microbiological agents (e.g. 
Brucellosis17) may be associated with inhalation and ingestion of 
                                                   
17 Brucellosis is an infectious disease caused by bacteria. Brucella bacteria may 
be passed by animals. Humans may become infected by eating or drinking 
something that is contaminated with Brucella, breathing in the organism 
(inhalation), or having the bacteria enter the body through skin wounds. 
Contamination of skin wounds and inhalation may pathways for contamination 
for persons working in slaughterhouses and / or meat packing plants. 
dust and aerosols during manure handling in the lairage, pens 
and livestock yards, as well as through incidental ingestion and 
dermal contact during carcass handling, intestine cleaning, 
handling of stomach contents, and waste and wastewater 
management operations. Exposure to dust from the spices used 
in meat processing may also act as an irritant or as an allergen.  
Recommended techniques to manage exposure to dust in 
general, as well as biological and microbiological agents, are 
addressed in the General EHS Guidelines. Recommendations 
specific to meat processing and rendering include: 
• 
Avoiding dust and aerosol generating activities (e.g. use of 
compressed air or high pressure water for cleaning) and 
where they cannot be avoided providing proper ventilation 
of enclosed or semi-enclosed areas to reduce or eliminate 
exposure to dust and aerosols;  
• 
Providing workers with PPE that is appropriate for the 
activity (e.g. protective clothing, gloves and masks) for 
workers in intestine and stomach cleaning operations; 
• 
Ensuring physical segregation of work and welfare facilities 
to maintain worker personal hygiene; 
• 
Designing holding areas for detained animals and high-risk 
materials to avoid direct contact with workers and ensuring 
that all waste materials, including those from rejected 
animals, are removed daily. 
Chemicals 
Exposure to chemicals (including gases and vapors) may occur 
during handling of chemicals related to cleaning and disinfecting 
process areas and lairage / livestock yards. In addition to the 
recommendations for the management of chemical hazards 
presented in the General EHS Guidelines, the following 
recommendations should be considered in the context of meat 
processing:
=== PAGE 9 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
9                   
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Take precautions (as described in the General EHS 
Guidelines) when handling and storing detergents and 
disinfectants. Chemicals should not be stored or 
transported with food or beverages, and should be secured 
in a locked and clearly identified area;  
• 
Prevent seasonal and other temporary workers from 
working with chemicals until they have been fully trained; 
• 
Provide respiratory protection and impermeable clothing for 
use during disinfection of pens and lairage areas.  
Heat, Cold, and Radiation 
Workers may be exposed to fluctuating internal climatic 
conditions, including heat and radiation from scalding, singers, 
brushing, black scrapers, and flame off, and cold from 
refrigerated rooms. Recommendations for the management of 
these hazards can be found in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Noise and Vibrations  
Occupational noise and vibration exposure sources include 
electrical stunning of pigs, electric saws, steam, condensers, 
ventilation, banging of equipment, and pressurized air 
equipment. Recommendations for the management of noise and 
vibration hazards can be found in the General EHS Guidelines.  
1.3 
Community Health and Safety  
Community health and safety impacts during the construction 
and decommissioning of slaughterhouses are common to those 
during the construction of other industrial facilities, and are 
discussed in the General EHS Guidelines.  
Community health and safety impacts during the operation 
phase common to most industry sectors, including those related 
to traffic safety from transport of raw materials and finished 
product, are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines. 
Industry-specific issues with the potential to impact the 
community or the public at large may include those associated 
with the potential presence of pathogens or microbes (e.g. 
Brucellosis) in processed meat.   
Food Safety Impacts and Management 
A food product recall brought about because of contaminated or 
adulterated food products found in commerce that are 
attributable to a specific company can damage a viable 
business. If a company can trace its products to specific lot 
numbers then recall is a matter of removing all foods associated 
with specific lot numbers. Without this ability the business may 
be destroyed. With a robust food safety program in place a 
company can protect itself from product adulteration, 
contamination and the impacts of food recalls.   
Meat processing should therefore be performed according to 
internationally recognized food safety standards consistent with 
the principles and practice of Hazard Analysis Critical Control 
Points (HACCP)18 and Codex Alimentarius.19 Recommended 
food safety principles include: 
• 
Respect “clean” and “dirty” zoning, designed in accordance 
with HACCP prerequisites (e.g. sanitary standard operating 
procedures) as discussed below; 
• 
Ensure the cooling chain is unbroken for sensitive products 
requiring refrigeration; 
• 
Facilitate tracing of like animal parts, so that all materials 
from carcasses detained by veterinary inspection can be 
removed; 
• 
Ensure animal traceability systems continue to track 
products once released into commerce; 
• 
Ensure efficient veterinary inspection, including 
examination of medical certificates (e.g. verification 
markings, tagging) for the animals;  
                                                   
18 International Standards Organization (2005). 
19 Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health Organization (1962–
2005).
=== PAGE 10 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
10                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
• 
Comply with veterinary and local environmental regulation 
and precautions for waste, sludge, manure, and by-
products; 
• 
Full institutionalization of HACCP prerequisites including: 
o 
Sanitation 
o 
Good management practices  
o 
Pest control 
o 
Chemical control 
o 
Allergen control 
o 
Customer complaints mechanism 
o 
Traceability and recall. 
 
2.0 
Performance Indicators and 
Monitoring 
2.1  
Environment  
Table 1 presents effluent guidelines for this sector. Guideline 
values for process emissions and effluents in this sector are 
indicative of good international industry practice as reflected in 
relevant standards of countries with recognized regulatory 
frameworks. These guidelines are achievable under normal 
operating conditions in appropriately designed and operated 
facilities through the application of pollution prevention and 
control techniques discussed in the preceding sections of this 
document. These levels should be achieved, without dilution, at 
least 95 percent of the time that the plant or unit is operating, to 
be calculated as a proportion of annual operating hours. 
Deviation from these levels in consideration of specific, local 
project conditions should be justified in the environmental 
assessment.  
Effluent guidelines are applicable for direct discharges of treated 
effluents to surface waters for general use. Site-specific 
discharge levels may be established based on the availability 
and conditions in use of publicly operated sewage collection and 
treatment systems or, if discharged directly to surface waters, 
on the receiving water use classification as described in the 
General EHS Guidelines. 
Emissions guidelines are applicable to process emissions. 
Combustion source emissions guidelines associated with 
steam- and power-generation activities from sources with a 
capacity equal to or lower than 50 MWth are addressed in the 
General EHS Guidelines with larger power source emissions 
addressed in the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power. 
Guidance on ambient considerations based on the total load of 
emissions is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.  
Table 1. Effluent levels for meat processing 
Pollutants 
Units 
Guideline Value 
pH 
pH 
6 – 9 
BOD5 
mg/l 
50 
COD 
mg/l 
250  
Total nitrogen  
mg/l 
10  
Total phosphorus 
mg/l 
2 
Oil and grease 
mg/l 
10 
Total suspended solids 
mg/l 
50 
Temperature increase 
°C 
<3b 
Total coliform bacteria 
MPNa / 100 ml 
400 
Active Ingredients / 
Antibiotics 
To be determined on a case specific 
basis 
Notes:  
a MPN = Most Probable Number 
b At the edge of a scientifically established mixing zone which takes into 
account ambient water quality, receiving water use, potential receptors and 
assimilative capacity 
 
Resource Use and Waste 
The following Tables 2 and 3 provide examples of resource 
consumption indicators for energy and water, in addition to 
waste generation in this sector. Industry benchmark values are 
provided for comparative purposes only and individual projects 
should target continual improvement in these areas.
=== PAGE 11 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
11                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
Table 2. Waste generation. 
Outputs per unit of 
product 
Mass load unit 
Industry 
benchmark 
Solid organic waste 
kg/ head cattle 
58a 
By-products for 
rendering 
kg/ head cattle 
110a 
Solid organic waste 
kg/ head pig 
2.2a 
By-products for 
rendering 
kg/ head pig 
20.8a 
Blood collection 
L/head cattle 
10–20b 
Blood collection 
L/head pig 
2–4b 
NOTES:  
a From Nordic Council of Ministers (2001). 
 b  European Commission (2005).  
 
Table 3. Resource and energy consumption. 
Inputs per unit of 
product 
Mass load unit 
Industry 
benchmarka 
kWh/t cattle 
carcass 
kWh/t pig carcass 
90–1094 
(cattle) 
110 – 760 (pig) 
Energy  
(fuel and electricity) 
consumption 
kWh/t raw 
materials 
400–650 
(dry rendering) 
570 
(wet rendering) 
m3/t carcass 
1.62–9 
(cattle) 
1.6–8.3 
(pig) 
Water consumption 
per unit of 
productiona 
m3/t raw 
materials 
0.5–1 
(rendering) 
Materials 
Detergent 
consumption 
kg/t cattle 
carcass 
0.2 
Source: European Commission. 2005.   
a Water consumption m3/t of slaughtered animal: 1.74 registered in case 
study in Bolivia (CPTS, 2005) 
 
Environmental Monitoring 
Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be 
implemented to address all activities that have been identified to 
have potentially significant impacts on the environment, during 
normal operations and upset conditions. Environmental 
monitoring activities should be based on direct or indirect 
indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable 
to the particular project.   
Monitoring frequency should be sufficient to provide 
representative data for the parameter being monitored. 
Monitoring should be conducted by trained individuals following 
monitoring and record-keeping procedures, and using properly 
calibrated and maintained equipment. Monitoring data should be 
analyzed and reviewed at regular intervals and compared with 
the operating standards so that any necessary corrective 
actions can be taken. Additional guidance on applicable 
sampling and analytical methods for emissions and effluents is 
provided in the General EHS Guidelines.   
2.2   Occupational Health and Safety  
Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines 
Occupational health and safety performance should be 
evaluated against internationally published exposure guidelines, 
of which examples include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) 
occupational exposure guidelines and Biological Exposure 
Indices (BEIs®) published by American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH),20  the Pocket 
Guide to Chemical Hazards published by the United States 
National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH),21 
Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs) published by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration of  the United 
                                                   
20 Available at: http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/ 
21 Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/
=== PAGE 12 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
12                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
States (OSHA),22 Indicative Occupational Exposure Limit Values 
published by European Union member states,23 or other similar 
sources. 
Accident and Fatality Rates 
Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among 
project workers (whether directly employed or subcontracted) to 
a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work 
time, different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Facility rates 
may be benchmarked against the performance of facilities in this 
sector in developed countries through consultation with 
published sources (e.g. US Bureau of Labor Statistics and UK 
Health and Safety Executive)24.     
Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring 
The working environment should be monitored for occupational 
hazards relevant to the specific project. Monitoring should be 
designed and implemented by accredited professionals25 as part 
of an occupational health and safety monitoring program. 
Facilities should also maintain a record of occupational 
accidents and diseases and dangerous occurrences and 
accidents. Additional guidance on occupational health and 
safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS 
Guidelines.   
                                                   
22 Available at: 
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDAR
DS&p_id=9992 
23 Available at: http://europe.osha.eu.int/good_practice/risks/ds/oel/ 
24 Available at: http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm 
25 Accredited professionals may include certified industrial hygienists, registered 
occupational hygienists, or certified safety professionals or their equivalent.
=== PAGE 13 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
13                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
3.0  References and Additional Sources
Arbejdstilsynet. 2005. Anmeldte arbejdsbetingede lidelser 1999-2000. 
Årsopgørelse 2004. Copenhagen: Arbejdstilsynet. (Reported accumulated 
occupational disease 1999-2004. Annual report 2004). Available at 
http://www.at.dk/graphics/at/07-Arbejdsmiljoe-i-tal/02-
Arbejdsskader/Aarsopgoerelser/Anmeldte-arbejdsbetingede-lidelser-2004.pdf  
Centro de Promoción de Tecnologías Sostenibles (CPTS). 2005. Guía Técnica 
de Producción Más Limpia para Mataderos de Bovinos. (Cleaner technology 
guidelines for slaughterhouses). Bolivia: CPTS. Available at www.cpts.org  
Danish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 2001. Renere Teknologi på 
svine- og kreaturslagterier - Resumé-rapport -Arbejdsrapport fra Miljøstyrelsen 
nr. 9, 2001. (Cleaner Technology In Porcine And Bovine Slaughterhouses). 
Copenhagen: Miljøstyrelsen. Danish EPA. Available at 
http://www.mst.dk/udgiv/Publikationer/2001/87-7944-528-4/html/default.htm  
European Commission (EC). 2005. Integrated Pollution Prevention And Control, 
Reference Document On Best Available Techniques In The Slaughterhouses 
And Animal By-Product Industries. BREF, European Commission, May 2005. 
Adopted final BREF. Seville: EC. Available at 
http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm  
European Commission (EC). 2003. Integrated Pollution Prevention And Control, 
Reference Document On Best Available Techniques In The Slaughterhouses 
And Animal By-Product Industries. BREF, European Commission, November 
2003. Draft document. Seville: EC. Available at 
http://www.bvt.umweltbundesamt.de/archiv-e/esslaughterhouses and 
http://www.bvt.umweltbundesamt.de/kurzue.htm 
European Commission (EC). 2005. Integrated Pollution Prevention And Control, 
Reference Document On Best Available Techniques In The Slaughterhouses 
And Animal By-Product Industries. BREF, European Commission, May 2005. 
Adopted final BREF. Seville: EC. Available at 
http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm 
European Community (EC). 1996. Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 
1996 Concerning Integrated P And Control (IPPC). Brussels: EC. Available at 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/ippc/index.htm Consolidated: 
http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/consleg/pdf/1996/en_1996L0061_do_001.pdf  
European Community (EC). 2002. Regulation (EC) no 1774/2002 Of The 
European Parliament And Of The Council Of 3 October 2002 Laying Down 
Health Rules Concerning Animal By-products Not Intended For Human 
Consumption. Brussels: . Available at www.europa.eu.int/eur-
lex/en/consleg/pdf/2002/en_2002R1774_do_001.pdf  
European Community. 1991. European Council Directive 91/497/EEC of 29 July 
1991 Aamending And Consolidating Directive 64/433/EEC On Health Problems 
Affecting Intra-community Trade In Fresh T Extend It To The Production And 
Marketing Of Fresh Meat. Brussels: EEC. Available at www.europa.eu.int/eur-
lex/en/consleg/pdf/1991/en_1991L0497_do_001.pdf  
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)and World Health Organization 
(WHO).1962–2005. “Codex Alimentarius”. Geneva: FAO and WHO. Available at 
http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp  
Health Canada 2004. Fact Sheet: Specified Risk Materials. Ottawa: Health 
Canada. Available at: www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ahc-asc/media/nr-cp/2003/bse-
esb_bk1_e.html  
Health and Safety Commission (HSC) 2005a. United Kingdom. Rates of 
Reported Fatal Injury To Workers, Nonfatal Injuries To Employees, And LFS 
Rates Of Reportable Injury To Workers In Manufacturing. London: National 
Statistics. Available at http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/industry/manufacturing-
ld1.htm#notes  
Health and Safety Commission (HSC). 2005b. Health and Safety Statistics 
2004/05. London: HSC. Available on page 21 
http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overall/hssh0405.pdf  
Health and Safety Commission (HSC) 2005c. United Kingdom. StatisticsOf Fatal 
Injuries 2004/05. Fatal Injuries To Workers In Manufacturing. London: HSC. 
Available on page 7 www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/overall/fatl0405.pdf  
Irish Environmental Protection Agency. 2004. IPC Guidance Note On Storage 
And Transfer Of Materials For Scheduled Activities. Wexford: Irish EPA. 
Available at www.epa.ie  
Irish Environmental Protection Agency. 1996a. BATNEEC Guidance Note For 
The Slaughter Of Animals. Wexford: Irish EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.ie/Licensing/IPPCLicensing/BATNEECGuidanceNotes/FileUploa
d,585,en.DOC 
Irish Environmental Protection Agency. 1996b. BATNEEC Guidance Note For 
The Rendering Of Animal By-Products. Wexford: Irish EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.ie/Licensing/IPPCLicensing/BATNEECGuidanceNotes/  
Irish Environmental Protection Agency. 1996c. BATNEEC Guidance Note For 
The Rendering Of Animal By-Products. Wexford: Irish EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.ie/Licensing/IPPCLicensing/BATNEECGuidanceNotes/  
India Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. LIQUID EFFLUENT 
STANDARDS - Category: 52.0 Slaughterhouse, Meat & Seafood Industry. EPA 
Notification S.O. 64(E), 18 January 1998. Delhi: India EPA. Available at 
http://www.cpcb.nic.in/standard52.htm  
[International Standards Organization. 2005. ISO 20000: 2005: Food Safety 
Management Systems: Requirements For Any Organization In The Food Chain. 
Geneva: ISO. Available at 
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/CatalogueDetailPage.CatalogueDetail?CSNUMBER=3
5466&ICS1=67&ICS2=20&ICS3= 
Livestock, Environment and Development Initiative (LEAD). 1996. Management 
Of Waste From Animal Product Processing. L.A.H.M. Verheijen, D. Wiersema, 
L.W. Hulshoff Pol, and J. De Wit. International Agriculture Centre, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands. Study Coordination by FAO, U.S. Agency for International 
Development, World Bank, and LEAD. Available at 
http://www.virtualcentre.org/en/library/CDlibrary/PUBS/X6114E/x6114e00.htm#
Contents or www.fao.org/WAIRDOCS/LEAD/X6114E/X6114E00.HTM  
México. 1997. Norma oficial mexicana nom-001-ECOL-1996, que establece los 
limites maximos permisibles de contaminantes en las descargas residuales en 
aguas y bienes nacionales. Publicada en Diario Oficial de la Federación de 
fecha 6 de enero de 1997. (Mexican official norm-001-ECOL-1996, which 
established the maximum permissible limits for contaminants in effluents). 
Available at 
http://www.rolac.unep.mx/deramb/compendio_legislacion/LegislacionNacionalM
exicana/Normas/Areas/NormasSEMARNAT/LIM ITES%20MAXIMOS%20PERMI
SIBLES%20DE%20CONTAMINANTES%20EN%20LAS%20DESCARGA.pdf
=== PAGE 14 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
14                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
Nordic Council of Ministers. 2001. TemaNord 2001:553, Best Available 
Techniques (BAT) In Nordic Slaughterhouses. Copenhagen: Nordic Council of 
Ministers.  
Thailand Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment (MOSTE).1996. 
Industrial Effluent Standard. Notification the Ministry of Science, Technology and 
Environment, No. 3, B.E.2539 (1996) issued under the Enhancement and 
Conservation of the National Environmental Quality Act B.E.2535 (1992). 
Bangkok: MOSTE. Available at 
http://www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water04.html#s1  
UK Environment Agency. 2001. Guidance For The Red Meat Processing (Cattle, 
Sheep, and Pig) Sector. Sector Guidance Note IPPC S0.01.Bristol: Environment 
Agency for England and Wales. In cooperation with the Scottish Environmental 
Protection Agency. Bristol: UK Environmental Agency. Available at 
http://www.environment-
agency.gov.uk/business/444304/444364/577703/?version=1&lang=_e and 
http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/pdf/GEHO1205BJZI-e-e.pdf  
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2000. Cleaner Production 
Assessment In Meat Processing. COWI for UNEP and Danish Environmental 
Protection Agency. Paris: UNEP. Available at http://www.agrifood-
forum.net/publications/guide/index.htm and http://www.agrifood-
forum.net/publications/guide/meatguide.zip 
U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2004a. Industry 
Injury And Illness Data – 2004. Supplemental News Release Tables. Table 
SNR05: Incident rate and number of nonfatal occupational injuries by industry, 
2004. Washington, D.C.: BLS. Available at  http://www.bls.gov/iif/home.htm and 
http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb1479.pdf  
U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2004b. Census Of 
Fatal Occupational Injuries Charts, 1992-2004. Number and rate of fatal 
occupational injuries by private industry sector, 2004. (Table page 10). 
Washington, D.C.: BLS. Available at 
http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0003.pdf  
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2004a. Technical Development 
Document For The Final Effluent Limitations Guidelines And Standards For The 
Meat And Poultry Products Point Source Category (40 CFR 432) Volume 2 of 4. 
EPA – 821-R-04-011. Washington, D.C.: U.S. EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/guide/mpp/tdd/vol2.pdf 
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/guide/mpp/  
US EPA. 2004b. Effluent Limitations Guidelines And New Source Performance 
Standards For The Meat And Poultry Products Point Source Category. (40 CFR  
432) Federal Register: September 8, 2004. Washington, D.C.: U.S. EPA. 
Available at http://www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-WATER/2004/September/Day-
08/w12017.htm (Introduction to Clean Water Act: 
http://www.epa.gov/region5/water/cwa.htm)  
US EPA. 2004c. Technical Development Document For The Final Effluent 
Limitations Guidelines And Standards For The Meat And Poultry Products Point 
Source Category (40 CFR 432) Volume 2 of 4. EPA – 821-R-04-011. 
Washington, DC: US EPA. Available at 
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/guide/mpp/tdd/vol2.pdf 
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/guide/mpp/ (Volume 1: 
http://www.epa.gov/waterscience/guide/mpp/tdd/vol1.pdf)  
Water Environment Federation. 2005. Standard Methods For The Examination 
Of Water And Wastewater, 21st Edition. American Public Health Association 
(APHA), American Water Works Association (AWWA), and Water Environment 
Federation (WEF). Available at www.standardmethods.org  
Waste Reduction Resource Center. 2005. The Meat Processing Topic Hub.™ 
Raleigh Water Reduction Resource Center. Available at 
http://wrrc.p2pays.org/p2rx/subsection.cfm?hub=449&subsec=15&nav=15&CFI
D=128311&CFTOKEN=14135054 and 
http://wrrc.p2pays.org/p2rx/toc.cfm?hub=449&subsec=7&nav=7
=== PAGE 15 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
15                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
Annex A: General Description of Industry Activities 
Meat processing facilities slaughter cattle and pigs and sell the 
carcasses directly or for further processing into meat products. 
In some slaughterhouses, inedible and discarded remains are 
rendered into by-products. Meat processing facilities are 
typically located outside of, or on the outskirts of, urban centers, 
allowing proximity to markets while reducing potential 
disturbance to neighbors. The trends in the sector and market 
are toward larger units, increased focus on product safety and 
animal welfare, improved food quality, increased levels of 
processing, and improved working conditions. Bovine and 
porcine slaughter differs mainly in the treatment of the animal 
hides or skin. While the hides are typically removed from the 
cattle carcasses and sold to tanneries, pig carcasses are 
normally processed with their skin. Slaughterhouses usually 
have separate bovine and porcine production lines. As the 
simplified process diagram illustrates, various operations are 
performed in bovine and porcine slaughter. 
Stunning, Sticking, and Bleeding 
Cattle are individually led into the stunning box where they are 
stunned (e.g. with a bolt pistol or other method. The immobilized 
cattle are unloaded from the box and hung from an overhead rail 
by the hind legs. They are then stuck to bleed over a collection 
trough. The blood may be stored in a refrigerated storage tank 
and / or processed on location. Pigs are stunned with either CO2 
anesthetization or with electric stunning (a captive bolt pistol 
might alternatively be applied). The immobilized pigs are hung 
from an overhead rail by the hind leg / rear toe and then stuck to 
bleed over a collection trough. 
Hide Removal / Decapitation (Bovine) and 
Scalding / Dehairing (Pigs) 
Following  bleeding of the bovine animal, the hooves, tail, udder 
/ testicles, head, and (sometimes) forelegs are removed. Cattle 
hide is removed from the animal either manually or 
mechanically. The hides are washed and preserved by cooling 
or adding salt or other bacteriostatic compounds before 
transport to the tannery.  
Following bleeding of pig carcasses, they are immersed in the 
scalding tank (60°C) for about 3 to 6 minutes to facilitate the 
removal of the bristles and to loosen the toenails. In the 
dehairing machine, the bristles, outer skin layer, and toenails 
are removed by a number of rotating rollers that brush or scrape 
the surface of the carcasses. The pig carcass is then transferred 
to the singeing oven where it is exposed to temperatures of 
900°C to 1,000°C for 5 to 15 seconds to eliminate residual hair 
and micro-organisms and to induce a firmer skin texture. After 
singeing, the carcass is cooled by showering with cold water. If 
pig meat is used to produce bacon, a heavier singe is applied 
and the rind is passed through a black-scraping machine to 
clean / polish the skin. Slaughterhouses may employ a flaying 
process to skin the pig carcasses after they are washed (with 
the minimum amount of water without compromising food 
hygiene safety) and dried, instead of using the scalding and 
dehairing procedure described above. Cleaning methods which 
utilize water should consider the potential for carcass 
contamination if the water quality is not carefully monitored as 
well as potential for significant water consumption if water 
conservation precautions are not incorporated.  Food safety 
should be the overriding concern when considering issues of 
water consumption and conservation.   
Evisceration and preparation 
The pig carcasses enter the ‘clean slaughter line’ for 
evisceration, during which the stomach, intestines, and pluck set 
(e.g. heart, lungs and trachea) are removed and transported to 
separate rooms for further treatment. The carcass is split, 
cleaned, weighed, inspected, and classified. The evisceration of 
the cattle carcass includes opening of the carcass at the belly
=== PAGE 16 ===
Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines 
  
MEAT PROCESSING           
 
 
 
APRIL 30, 2007                                                                                                          
 
16                    
WORLD BANK GROUP
and removing the bladder, uterus, liver, stomachs, and 
intestines and then, after cutting through the diaphragm, 
removing the pluck set. Green offal (e.g. the digestive tract and 
associated organs) and red offal (e.g. the liver, kidney and 
heart) undergo further cleaning in separate departments. 
Following evisceration, the spinal cords are cut free and 
removed, and the cattle carcass is split with an electric saw.  
After inspection, the carcass is rinsed before chilling / freezing 
and maturation. Some slaughterhouses also perform on-site 
processing (e.g. cutting, deboning, and further meat processing 
activities including grinding, mixing with additives, pickling, 
smoking, cooking, and canning) to produce retail cuts. 
Rendering 
Although rendering is usually conducted at off-site facilities, 
some meat processing facilities have special, isolated areas of 
the slaughterhouse designated for on-site rendering of the by-
products from slaughter (e.g. blood and fat). Rendering typically 
includes evaporative processes that generate a foul odor. 
Specialized off-site rendering plants receive animal by-products 
and waste from a variety of sectors including meat processing 
plants, poultry rearing and processing, butchers shops, 
supermarkets, and livestock-rearing facilities. Methods used for 
fat melting include batch wet fat melting; batch dry fat melting; 
and continuous wet fat melting. Batch wet fat melting is the most 
common method and includes the use of an autoclave to heat 
materials under pressure with steam. Afterward the free fat is 
drained to an intermediary tank and the moist grease is pressed 
and then dried. If the raw materials are clean and fresh, the fat 
can be used for food production. Blood can be processed to use 
the plasma in meat products, (e.g. cooked sausages), and for 
pet food and livestock feed. 26 
                                                   
26 The collected blood is filtered and centrifuged to remove gross particles. The plasma 
contains approximately 8 percent solids and is concentrated by reverse osmosis or 
nanofiltration, machine homogenized, and pressurized before spray drying. Alternatively, 
the plasma may be concentrated by vacuum evaporation. The red cell fraction can be spray 
 
                                                                                  
dried after the centrifugation and used for natural pigment in the meat industry, as fertilizer, 
or in pet food / animal feed. 
Reception of animals, lairage 
Stunning, sticking, and bleeding 
Hide removal /scalding, dehairing 
Decapitation / removal of legs, udder  
Evisceration (gut set / pluck set) 
Splitting 
Inspection 
Carcass cleaning 
Chilling 
Unloading 
Cutting / deboning 
Packaging / on-site rendering 
Figure A.1: Bovine / Porcine Slaughter Process
